In Yichang city, Hubei province, the first outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) commenced on 24 January 2020 in the Yichang Third People's Hospital.
With 931 persons becoming infected and the increasing number of COVID‐19 patients, the medical resources of the Yichang Third People's Hospital were in short supply.
In this case, Jiangnan District of Yichang Central People's Hospital has been put into use urgently, and nearly 30% of COVID‐19 confirmed patients in Yichang have been treated in our hospital.
However, although there are concerns about whether the use of corticosteroids will slow down the clearance of the coronavirus
 and increase the possibility of opportunistic infections
, in severe cases, especially in critically ill COVID‐19 patients, the use of corticosteroids seems to be indispensable.
, 
,
A retrospective comparison study was performed on COVID‐19 patients under 50 years old who were admitted between 30 January and 20 February 2020.
Regardless of whether the patient has a positive nucleic acid test result before hospital admission, we re‐tested the nasopharyngeal swabs for COVID‐19 on the first day of admission.
Typology of COVID‐19: Mild: the clinical symptoms are mild and no pneumonia manifestations can be found in imaging.
COVID‐19 is an animal‐derived virus,
 bats may be the host of the virus and intermediate hosts may include pangolins.
To date, 237 cases of COVID‐19 diagnosed patients in Yichang City, Hubei Province have been treated in our hospital.
The age of all the COVID‐19 patients treated in our hospital range from 0.5 to 87 years old, and there is no significant difference in the number of infections based on their gender, which indicates that the entire population is susceptible to COVID‐19, regardless of gender or age.
Unfortunately, there are still no specific drug to treat COVID‐19 at present.
In our retrospective non‐randomized study, 34 patients under 50 years old and diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) were included.
By comparing the clinical data we concluded that corticosteroids therapy can effectively release COVID‐19 symptoms such as persistent fever and difficult in breathing, improve oxygenation, and prevent disease progression.
Highlights  1. The use of glucocorticoids prolongs the time required for COVID‐19 patients to turn negative consecutively for nucleic acids test.
2. The use of glucocorticoids in critical and severe COVID‐19 typology patients can prevent the progression of this disease, especially to promote the absorption of CT lesion images  3.
We confirm the safety and necessity of glucocorticoids applications in severe and critical COVID‐19 patients.