The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has affected over 6.5 million people thus far, resulting in the death of over four hundred thousand individuals worldwide (1).
Recently, new loss of the sense of smell, either total (anosmia) or partial (hyposmia), has been recognised as a symptom of COVID-19 by the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html).
Accordingly, additional research focus has now been placed on exploring anosmia and the involvement of olfactory receptors (ORs) in COVID-19 (2).
Of note, the severity of COVID-19 shows a positive association with certain comorbidities which affect these tissues/systems, including asthma, obesity, diabetes and cancer (7).
As such, concentrating on non-neuronal (peripheral) expression of ORs, here we provide a comprehensive analysis of the expression profile of ORs in peripheral tissues, several of which co-express ACE2, TMPRSS2 and CTSL and are correspondingly associated with comorbidities predisposing to severe COVID-19 (Fig. 1).
Given that cancer is concidered as a comorbididity which predisposes to severe COVID-19, we also investigated the pan-cancer expression of ORs, including data regarding methylation and mutational profiles.
Using the TCGA datasets for all cancers, only four ORs appeared to be significantly differentially regulated (Fig. 4).
However, despite the extensive data regarding decreased methylation status within an array of data sets, when compared with GEPIA expression data, changes in methylation status of nine ORs did not significantly correlate with changes in gene expression.
Finally, the data from cBioPortal revealed that the highest level of alterations in the data set for these ORs relates to gene amplification or mutation across the cancer panel (Fig. 6).
The potential involvement of ORs in the loss of smell as one of the COVID-19 presenting symptoms has been hypothesized since the first clinical cases of COVID-19 patients with anosmia (15).
Indeed, given the known expression and involvement of the airway smooth muscle ORs in bronchodilation and airway relaxation (5); such peripheral expression of ORs may have additional implications relating to COVID-19.
As such, damage and potential interference with signalling pathways associated with OR functions, as noted for nasal epithelial ORs, may contribute to underlying mechanisms predisposing to adverse COVID-19 related clinical outcomes in patients with certain comorbidities (e.g., asthma or cancer) (16).
In addition, our findings suggest potential links which should be explored in the context of male preponderance for severe COVID-19, given that a number of ORs were overexpressed in testes.
Interestingly, it has been suggested that androgen sensitivity can be a determinant of the severity COVID-19 manifests (24).
The noted high levels of TMPRSS2 and CTSL expression, coupled with the presented data regarding OR expression (e.g., OR51E2) in malignant and healthy tissues suggest additional implications which merit further research; for example, regarding increased expression in the prostate and predisposition to severe COVID-19 documented in male patients (14,25).
New loss of smell (anosmia/hyposmia) is now recognized as a COVID-19 related symptom, which may be caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection and damage of the olfactory receptor (OR) cells in the nasal neuroepithelium and/or central involvement of the olfactory bulb.
Further in vitro and clinical studies are clearly required to elucidate the role of ORs, both at the olfactory level and the periphery, in the context of COVID-19.