Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) clinical data has so far shown that the mortality rate for men is higher than for women.
An initial report released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on population‐based surveillance sampled across 14 states, representing 10% of the US population, has indicated that age and comorbidities are associated with increased hospitalization rates of patients with COVID‐19.
Based on data from literature, we propose a novel mechanism of the observed sex differences in clinical outcomes in patients and identify a role for the transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) as a contributing factor to the more severe outcomes noted for COVID‐19.
While ACE2 is the main receptor for the spike protein for both viruses, its expression and gene polymorphisms did not influence sex‐specific effects or outcomes for SARS
 or COVID‐19 (based on 2 recent preprint studies published on medRxiv that have yet to be peer‐reviewed at the time of writing).
Indeed, the clinical manifestations of COVID‐19 include not only complications from acute myocardial injury, elevated liver enzymes, and acute kidney injury in patients presenting to hospitals, but also gastrointestinal symptoms in community patients experiencing milder forms of the disease.
The study proposed that TMPRSS2 could possibly be a candidate gene that contributes to the COVID‐19 epidemiologic data seen in the Italian population, with higher death rates and differences in severity among sexes compared to East Asians.
We may never know the true incidence rates for COVID‐19; however, looking at current data, Europe and the United States have overtaken China and eastern Asia as the epicenters of the pandemic.
Clinically, increases in IL‐6 have been linked to severe COVID‐19 cases
 and have been discussed as a potential biomarker.
Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) has been noted in some severe patients of COVID‐19.
Furthermore, autopsy findings from COVID‐19 patients revealed that tissues that had been destroyed by SARS‐CoV‐2 exhibited characteristics of the so‐called primary cytokine storm (induced by viral infection and mainly produced by alveolar macrophages, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells), rather than those observed in secondary cytokine storm (induced by different subsets of activated T lymphocytes in late‐stage viral infections or a complication of T‐cell–engaging therapies).
Since SARS‐CoV‐2 shares similar mechanisms of viral entry with SARS‐CoV, this transgenic model could potentially be used to study novel therapeutics for COVID‐19.
In summary, no in vivo preclinical data for SARS‐CoV‐2 are available to justify any of the treatment regimens for combination trials currently under investigation for COVID‐19, as an in vivo mouse model for SARS‐CoV‐2 is not yet available, and it would require too much time to test each proposed drug combination in primate models of human disease or use existing models for MERS‐CoV and SARS‐CoV pathogenesis.
There is no doubt that antivirals and supportive treatments are key areas to focus on in treating patients with COVID‐19.
Our proposed treatment combination is based on existing data from in vitro/in vivo studies that have been conducted for SARS‐CoV and MERS‐CoV for each individual agent as well as clinical features of COVID‐19 since current in vivo animal models are not available for SARS‐CoV‐2.
Both are being investigated in Japan and other countries for their ability to block SARS‐CoV‐2 entry, with Japan initiating a clinical trial for nafamostat (which is also a short‐acting anticoagulant) for COVID‐19–positive patients.
Direct inhibition of TMPRSS2 using protease inhibitors (nafamostat) or indirectly by downregulating TMPRSS2 expression with androgen pathway inhibitors, as with all potential novel treatments for COVID‐19, are promising hypotheses, and it remains to be determined whether this approach can mediate the sex‐specific outcomes and severity of outcomes in patients.
Another drug under investigation for COVID‐19 is remdesivir, an RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with antiviral activity, which has been shown to act on viral replication after entry in SARS‐CoV‐2.
While remdesivir is not US Food and Drug Administration approved for any indications, the WHO considered it as a promising drug candidate to treat COVID‐19 based on its broad‐spectrum activity, in vitro/in vivo data for coronaviruses (SARS‐CoV‐2, SARS‐CoV, and MERS‐CoV), and clinical safety data from Ebola virus disease trials.
Initial results of the compassionate use of remdesivir in patients with COVID‐19 have shown some encouraging results.
Additionally, there are clinical trials using the antimalarial drugs hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and chloroquine to treat COVID‐19 patients.
The clinical data for HCQ from early trials for COVID‐19 have been mixed, with some studies showing encouraging results and others demonstrating lack of efficacy.
, 
,
Potential inhibitors of cytokine storm have shown some clinical benefit in COVID‐19 patients and include agents that target cytokine release such the anti–IL‐6 antibody tocilizumab, the anti‐human granulocyte macrophage colony‐stimulating factor monoclonal antibody lenzilumab, or the Janus kinase 1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib (with phase III trials initiated or being planned for COVID‐19).
Sanders et al
 provide a comprehensive review of the recent clinical experience for remdesivir, HCQ, and other therapeutics, including inhibitors of CRS that are currently under investigation as potential COVID‐19 treatments.
Since high levels of inflammatory markers such as IL‐6 have been reported in patients experiencing COVID‐19 complications, we suggest using this potential clinical biomarker or any of the above laboratory markers as a guide to monitor patients on drug therapy.
COVID‐19 treatment will involve a polypharmacy approach; we therefore expect a multitude of adverse effects from these drug combinations.
There are also many factors that can explain the difference in outcomes in men and women afflicted with COVID‐19, and TMPRSS2 emerges as an interesting candidate.
Moreover, genotyping studies performed on clinical specimens collected from patients on COVID‐19 trials are warranted to further evaluate known SNPs and to find additional functional polymorphisms in the TMPRSS2 gene.
On a broader scope, multiple institutions have initiated genomic investigations in a project called the COVID Host Genetics Initiative.
SNPs that are confirmed to be predictive biomarkers can be incorporated in the CDC's current list of clinical biomarkers for disease severity as discussed above.