Since its emergence, the 2019 strain of coronavirus (hereafter COVID-19) has been a rising international cause of morbidity and mortality.
This global devastation is partly explained by the nature of viral transmission; the median incubation time from COVID-19 infection to the appearance of symptomatic dyspnea ranges from four to seven days, creating a large window of time for transmission during which patients have few symptoms (Guan et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020).
Almost all COVID-19 patients who develop ARDS require mechanical ventilation; these patients tend to remain ventilator dependent for 10–14 d, and most ventilated patients ultimately succumb to the disease (Bhatraju et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020).
There is a compelling case for innate immune hyperactivity in driving the acute lung injury that defines severe COVID-19 infections.
Both DAMPs and PAMPs are likely generated during initial infection and lysis of pneumocytes by COVID-19.
Significant evidence indicates that a dysregulated innate immune response contributes to the clinical presentation of patients with severe COVID-19 infections.
COVID-19–infected patients harbor an expanded population of circulating monocytes that secrete both IL-6 and IL-1β (Wen et al., 2020
Preprint; Zhang et al., 2020
Preprint); as a result, patients with COVID-19 have elevated levels of serum IL-6, as well as lactate dehydrogenase levels, compared with healthy controls (Chen et al., 2020a).
These elevations in innate immune cytokines have led to the hypothesis that an innate immune-mediated “cytokine storm,” similar to the cytokine release syndrome (CRS) observed in patients receiving treatment with chimeric antigen receptor–transduced T cells (CAR-T), is primarily responsible for the toxicity and end-organ damage mediated by COVID-19 infections (Grupp et al., 2013; Mehta et al., 2020).
A role for cytokine-driven neutrophil mobilization in COVID-associated lung toxicity may explain why neutrophilia, despite the absence of secondary bacterial infections, is associated with mortality (Lagunas-Rangel, 2020), and why administration of monoclonal antibodies targeting IL-6 has shown initial clinical promise (Gritti et al., 2020).
However, caution is warranted before invoking IL-6–mediated CRS as the sole pathological driver in severe COVID-19 infections.
First, COVID-19 patients lacks most of the hallmarks of CRS, including hypotension, capillary leak syndrome, and neurotoxicity (Hay et al., 2017).
Second, the clinical course of CRS is far more acute than that seen in COVID-19 infections, with fever occurring within 2 d and neurotoxicity within 5 d (Neelapu et al., 2018).
Accordingly, serum IL-6 levels are far lower in COVID-19 infections than in CRS, with peak levels typically less than 100 pg/ml in COVID-19, compared with 1,000–10,000 pg/ml in CRS (Chen et al., 2020a; Maude et al., 2014).
Third, deaths in COVID-19–infected patients appear to be due to primary respiratory failure, rather than from distributive shock or status epilepticus, as was predominantly seen in CRS-associated deaths (Lee et al., 2014).
Perhaps most importantly, the clinical results of therapeutic blockade of circulating IL-6 with tocilizumab or siltuximab are thus far mixed; one clinical trial showed evidence of improvement in 33% of patients, at least suggesting that in many cases, a hyperinflammatory response is not primarily responsible for COVID-19–associated morbidity and mortality (Gritti et al., 2020).
In the case of viral infections such as COVID-19, however, macrophage activation is occurring as a primary response to viral infection (Tate et al., 2016).
It is also worth noting that while many arms of the innate immune response are potently activated by COVID-19, the type I and type III interferon response appears to be muted in response to COVID-19 infection (Blanco-Melo et al., 2020
Preprint), suggesting that some aspects of the innate immune response to COVID-19 might actually benefit from careful amplification (Kotenko et al., 2003).
Regardless of whether innate immune-mediated toxic inflammation contributes to COVID-19–related morbidity and mortality, it is clear that viral dissemination is a key driver of severe disease.
The rare histopathologic specimens obtained either postmortem or via liver or kidney biopsy in COVID-19–infected patients have almost universally revealed the presence of inclusion bodies, consistent with viral persistence (Chen et al., 2020
Preprint; Diao et al., 2020
Preprint; Yao et al., 2020).
What is permitting viral dissemination in patients who succumb to COVID-19 infections?
Is the clinical toxicity observed during COVID-19 infection a product of adaptive immune hyperactivity or suppression?
The clinical presentation of COVID-19 infection is more consistent with a subacute rather than an acute viral illness.
Compared with H1N1 influenza infections, in which the median incubation time was 2 d and the majority of intensive care unit admissions occurred within 24–48 h of admission (Bautista et al., 2010), COVID-19–infected patients present to the hospital with a median incubation time of 5–7 d and are typically hospitalized for an additional 3–4 d before requiring intensive care unit admission and/or mechanical ventilation (Huang et al., 2020).
This subacute pattern of progression raises the possibility that immunosuppression, due both to T cell depletion and exhaustion, contributes to COVID-19 viral persistence and mortality.
Lymphopenia is the most consistent laboratory abnormality in COVID-19–infected patients.
Notably, progressive lymphodepletion is observed in patients who clinically deteriorate during COVID-19 infection, whereas recovery of lymphocyte counts tends to directly precede clinical recovery (Chen et al., 2020
Preprint).
Similar to T cells from both mice and humans with chronic viral infections (Day et al., 2006; Fisicaro et al., 2017; Wherry et al., 2007), both lung-resident and circulating T cells from COVID-19 patients potently up-regulate markers of T cell exhaustion, including PD-1 and Tim-3 (Diao et al., 2020
Preprint).
T cells from severe COVID-19 patients exhibit transcriptional hallmarks of terminal T cell exhaustion including expression of CCL4 and GZMB; notably, the most expanded T cell population in the bronchoalveolar lavage of severe COVID-19 patients is marked by expression of MKI67 and TYMS, genes that are specifically up-regulated in terminally exhausted CD8+
Conversely, single-cell sequencing of peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients recovering from COVID-19 infection shows signs of clonal expansion, T cell activation, and T cell memory formation, consistent with an effective adaptive immune response (Wen et al., 2020
Preprint).
T cells to inflammation and lung pathology; indeed, it is worth noting that many markers of T cell exhaustion are also up-regulated in effector T cells, and lung-infiltrating T cells from more mild COVID infections significantly up-regulated genes related to T cell activation.
A role for the adaptive immune system in suppressing COVID-19 viral dissemination may explain the association of COVID-19 disease severity with age.
A smaller, more restricted T cell repertoire is likely more prone to antigen-mediated exhaustion during chronic viral infections; conversely, the relatively diverse and expanded pool of naive T cells may explain the relatively diminished severity of COVID-19 infections in children (Xu et al., 2020b).
In stark contrast to COVID-19, H1N1 occurred frequently and caused significant morbidity in children; of note, H1N1 infection caused lymphopenia in the majority of pediatric patients (Rhim et al., 2011).
Therapeutically, high-dose glucocorticoids are the only strategy used thus far to modulate the adaptive immune system of COVID-19 patients.
One commonly used therapeutic strategy in severe viral infections, but not yet in COVID-19–infected patients, is the use of antioxidants such as N-acetylcysteine (N-Ac).
Is there a way to therapeutically balance immune toxicity and immunosuppression to improve outcomes in COVID-19–infected patients?
To answer to this question, we require a deeper understanding of both innate and adaptive immune evolution over the course of COVID-19 illness.
To this end, there is a need to obtain serial peripheral blood, and, when technically feasible and clinically appropriate, bronchoalveolar lavage samples over the course of COVID-19 infection and clearance.
The answer to this question will have key implications for the appropriate design of clinical trials aimed as modulating the anti-COVID immune response.
Longitudinal assessment of anti-COVID immune responses is particularly important in the setting of therapeutic interventions, both antiviral and immune-targeted.
For example, patients who respond to IL-6 blockade have a parallel improvement in lymphocyte counts (Xu et al., 2020a
Preprint), suggesting that in some cases, COVID-19–associated lymphopenia may be a product of bystander inflammation (Stelekati et al., 2014).
Longitudinal sampling of COVID-19–infected patients with either inherent or iatrogenic disruption of host immunity may help identify specific regulators of the anti-COVID immune response (Box 2).
Second, patients with solid organ transplants require ongoing T cell immunosuppression, offering an opportunity to explore the contribution of the T cell–dependent immune response to COVID-19.
In either early or late disease, an effective humoral response is a key contributor to viral clearance; here, we draw particular attention to the promise of treating infected patients with serum from convalescent patients that is rich in immunoglobulins targeting COVID-19 (Duan et al., 2020).
4.
This Perspective explores the contributions of the innate and adaptive immune systems to both viral control as well as toxicity during COVID-19 infections and offers suggestions to both understand and therapeutically modulate anti-COVID immunity.
Compared with recent viral outbreaks, COVID-19 infection has a relatively high mortality rate, the reasons for which are not entirely clear.
Furthermore, treatment options for COVID-19 infection are currently limited.
In this Perspective, we explore the contributions of the innate and adaptive immune systems to both viral control as well as toxicity during COVID-19 infections and offer suggestions to both understand and therapeutically modulate anti-COVID immunity.