The incredible fast worldwide spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) prompt the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare COVID‐19 as a pandemic on 11 March 2020.
More than 1 776 867 confirmed cases of COVID‐19 and more than 111 828 fatalities in 185 countries have been attributed to SARS‐CoV‐2 as of 14 April 2020 (https://who.sprinklr.com/).
Molecular tests (real‐time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, RT‐qPCR) were generally used to confirm the clinical diagnosis of COVID‐19.
Cardiovascular complications with embolism due to COVID‐19 have been reported recently.
, 
, 
, 
 Acute myocardial injury associated with COVID‐19 manifested as an increase of high‐sensitivity cardiac troponin levels.
Cardiovascular involvement in COVID‐19 seems to be a notable complication.
First single case reports could show viral particles in interstitial cytopathic macrophages and their surroundings in EMB of a severe COVID‐19 shock patient by electron microscopic analyses.
Based on the results of currently published research, it seems important to discuss the manifestations and characteristics of myocardial damage induced by COVID‐19.
Moreover, patients with COVID‐19 are known to be at higher risk of acute pulmonary embolism, and elevated d‐dimer levels on admission are predictive of adverse outcomes for patients with COVID‐19.
Bai et al.
 reported vascular thickening to be significantly associated with COVID‐19 compared with non–COVID‐19 pneumonia (59% vs. 22%, P < 0.001).
In addition, recent histologically post‐mortem analyses in COVID‐10 positive patients revealed lymphocytic endotheliitis in different organs with evidence of direct viral infection, indicating endothelial dysfunction as a possible principle determination of microvascular dysfunction by shifting the vascular equilibrium towards more vasoconstriction with subsequent organ ischaemia and inflammation.
Although nearly all organs seemed to be affected by COVID‐19, we currently do not know in‐depth details about the organ‐specific infection by SARS‐CoV‐2.
In this regard, Tavazzi and coworkers have shown recently in their case description using electron microscopy on EMBs of a patient with COVID‐19 in cardiogenic shock that SARS‐CoV‐2 particles could be localized to interstitial macrophages and their surroundings but not in cardiomyocytes.
Cardiovascular complications with myocarditis and embolism due to COVID‐19 have been reported.