Driven by a desire to reduce potential infections during the COVID-19 pandemic, health authorities and professional bodies in the United Kingdom (UK) [1], Canada [2] and Australia [3] have issued urgent statements designed to limit the need for pregnant women to attend prolonged appointments at pathology testing centers for OGTTs.
Clearly, they differ in many ways, both pre and post COVID-19.
For comparison of GDM frequency using the pre and post COVID-19 diagnostic processes and criteria, we have considered national diagnostic criteria.
Table 1 shows the current recommendations for GDM testing in each of the three countries, their revised recommendations for use during the COVID-19 pandemic (indicated by the column entitled “Modified GDM diagnostic approach during COVID-19 pandemic”) and the specific diagnostic process and threshold(s) evaluated in the current study (indicated by the column entitled “Post-COVID approach tested in current paper”).
Each participant was classified into the following groups for each of the UK, Canadian and Australian diagnostic criteria (as specified in Table 1): 1) “Missed GDM” - GDM by local pre COVID-19 criteria but not identified as GDM using local post COVID-19 criteria; 2) GDM by local post COVID-19 criteria; and 3) not GDM by both pre and post COVID-19 local criteria.
Using the newly recommended national COVID-19 processes and criteria would result in markedly reduced GDM frequency in the UK (81% reduction to 2.5%) and Canada (82% reduction to 1.7%), with a less marked 25% reduction to 12.7% in Australia (Fig. 1).
Considering the UK situation (Table 3), the 684 women currently classified as GDM but who would not be detected (“missed”) under the post COVID-19 guidelines demonstrate statistically significantly higher rates of preterm birth, LGA, primary CS, neonatal hyperinsulinemia and neonatal adiposity than non GDM women.
Considering the Canadian criteria (Table 4
), the 524 women currently classified as GDM but considered non GDM under post COVID-19 guidelines demonstrate increased risks (compared to non-GDM women) for all the outcomes listed for the UK, including pregnancy related hypertension.
The 253 women with IADPSG GDM, who would be “missed” under the proposed Australian post COVID-19 process (fasting glucose followed by selective OGTT, no change in diagnostic thresholds) have outcome frequencies similar to those of non GDM women, whilst those who would remain in the GDM group with post COVID-19 testing show significantly higher risks for all listed outcomes.
Table 3, Table 4, Table 5 also document the proportion of pregnancy complications which occurred amongst GDM women using pre COVID-19 diagnostic processes, but which would be “missed” post COVID-19 as these women would no longer be classified as GDM and therefore would no longer receive any additional care.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the three different suggested modifications in diagnostic strategies proposed for GDM testing in response to the COVID-19 pandemic also appear to have different potential advantages and disadvantages [14].
The UK (1) and Canadian (2) strategies both prioritize avoidance of OGTTs with the intention of reducing potential COVID-19 exposure.
In the case of the Canadian criteria (Table 4), the “Missed GDM” women carry risks which are comparable to those who would still be detected under post COVID-19 guidelines and the percentage of GDM outcomes missed generally exceeds the overall reduction in GDM prevalence.
However, we acknowledge that, for the UK and Canada, our processes do not precisely match current or proposed (post COVID-19) testing recommendations for GDM.
The COVID-19 pandemic poses a variety of serious challenges to pregnancy care [22] and GDM detection and management are only one part of a complex and rapidly evolving set of adaptations to care (e.g. use of telehealth or telephone visits) designed to both optimize pregnancy outcomes and protect pregnant women and health care staff.
A woman who contracts COVID-19 infection during pregnancy clearly may acquire this through household or community transmission, rather than specifically at a pathology collection centre, so our primary clinical aim should be to reduce avoidable exposure and to encourage general protective measures in other settings.
Australia has experienced far fewer COVID-19 cases than the UK or Canada, and testing recommendations have already been modified, with routine OGTTs again recommended where COVID-19 transmission risk is considered low [23], the strategy described in this paper recommended for moderate risk situations and fasting glucose testing alone preferred if COVID-19 risk is considered high.
Highlights     •  Guidelines for GDM diagnosis during COVID have changed.
We assessed how altered diagnostic processes and criteria for gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) recommended by the United Kingdom (UK), Canada and Australia for use during the COVID-19 pandemic would affect both GDM frequency and related adverse outcomes.
All post COVID-19 modified pathways reduced GDM frequency – UK (81%), Canada (82%) and Australia (25%).
Canadian women whose GDM would remain undetected post COVID-19 (missed GDMs) displayed similar rates of pregnancy complications to those with post COVID-19 GDM.
Each has both potential benefits in terms of reduction in potential exposure to COVID-19 and costs in terms of missed opportunities to influence pregnancy and postpartum outcomes.