Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [1], which was first identified in Wuhan, China, in December 2019, and has rapidly spread globally, resulting in the ongoing pandemic [2].
Recently, Korean Society for Laboratory Medicine (KSLM) and the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) published guidelines for diagnosing COVID-19 in clinical laboratories in Korea [3].
These guidelines provide appropriate solutions to COVID-19 diagnosis.
However, many practical and technical issues frequently arise in clinical laboratories conducting COVID-19 testing, including those involving nucleic acid extraction, nucleic acid amplification reagents, and interpretation of test results.
The COVID-19 Diagnosis Test Management Committee was established by the KCDC on Feb 28, 2020, to provide appropriate solutions to such matters in the field through careful review and counseling by specialized experts in the public and private sectors.
On behalf of the COVID-19 Diagnosis Test Management Committee, we present supplementary information to the “Guidelines for Laboratory Diagnosis of COVID-19 in Korea” to provide solutions for practical issues faced when conducting COVID-19 diagnostic testing using real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR [3].
These practical guidelines are mostly based on expert opinions regarding samples, nucleic acid extraction, nucleic acid amplification reagents, and interpretation of test results and have been formed with the experience from more than 700,000 COVID-19 tests using five emergency use authorization (EUA) assays in Korea.
Since eNAT contains guanidine thiocyanate (a type of chaotropic salt) that prevents the degradation of nucleic acids in the medium, it is a good option when testing microbial nucleic acids only; the same applies to the COVID-19 real-time RT-PCR test.
However, heat inactivation of samples through treatment at 56°C for 30 minutes was shown to adversely affect the efficiency of RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 detection [8]; therefore, proteinase K treatment at 50–65°C is not recommended for COVID-19 real-time RT-PCR.
The product manual of the DiaPlexQ 2019-nCoV kit (SolGent, Daejeon, Korea) states that a sample can indicate COVID-19 infection if the result for one of the two genes is positive.
This is in contrast with the KSLM guidelines, which specifies that confirmation of COVID-19 requires positive results for all genes [3].
Both Allplex 2019-nCoV (Seegene, Seoul, Korea) and Standard M nCoV Real-Time Detection kits (SD Biosensors, Suwon, Korea) have the advantage of facilitating the observation of the entire process of COVID-19 molecular testing to check nucleic acid extraction, the impact of the PCR inhibitor, and nucleic acid amplification since the IC is directly added to the sample before nucleic acid extraction.
The KCDC’s criteria for the quarantine release of patients with COVID-19 include clinical improvement with negative results from at least two consecutive respiratory samples collected ≥24 hours apart [17].
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
Early detection of COVID-19 and immediate isolation of infected patients from the naive population are important to prevent further pandemic spread of the infection.
Real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR to detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA is currently the most reliable diagnostic method for confirming COVID-19 worldwide.
Guidelines for clinical laboratories on the COVID-19 diagnosis have been recently published by Korean Society for Laboratory Medicine and the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
However, these formal guidelines do not address common practical laboratory issues related to COVID-19 real-time RT-PCR testing and their solutions.
Therefore, this guideline is intended as a practical and technical supplement to the “Guidelines for Laboratory Diagnosis of COVID-19 in Korea”.