Arizona’s first confirmed case of COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, was detected in late January 2020 in a student attending Arizona State University who had traveled to China (5).
In order to assist with both local and global efforts to track the spread and evolution of this virus, we began intensive sequencing of viral genomes from across Arizona and deposition of these sequences in the GISAID database, which makes them accessible to the research community for downstream analyses, notably including real-time pathogen tracking through Nextstrain (12).
First, did the initial case of COVID-19 in Arizona lead to cryptic community transmission that helped to fuel the ongoing epidemic?
This data set includes at least one genome from 11 of the 15 Arizona counties (see Table S3 in the supplemental material).
The first case of COVID-19 in Arizona (AZ1) was documented in late January 2020, and contact tracing suggested that this initial case did not result in additional symptomatic infections within the state (5).
The genomes used in this analysis were selected using a novel bioinformatics pipeline (see Materials and Methods), which subsampled genomes uploaded to GISAID to reduce the size of the data set while representing the temporal, spatial, and genetic diversity of the full data set.
A reduced version of this data set, including 376 genomes with complete date information, was used in the Bayesian analysis.
1.
Sequence database representation through time for each of the six major named lineages or sublineages observed in Arizona.
Lineages were assigned using Pangolin (37) for all sequences uploaded to GISAID as of 16 April 2020.
For this analysis, we considered the full collection of SARS-CoV-2 genomes available on GISAID (as of 16 April 2020).
The second case of COVID-19 in Arizona was reported on 3 March from a traveler who returned from France on 27 February (40).
Based on our phylogenetic analysis, it is clear that the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak in Arizona has been fueled by multiple distinct introductions of SARS-CoV-2 to the state.
Sequences included in the analyses presented here were derived from GISAID (accessed on 16 April 2020), NCBI GenBank, and sequences generated by our teams at Northern Arizona University and TGen North (n = 75), Arizona State University (n = 3), and University of Arizona (n = 1) (collectively referred to as the “Arizona sequences”).
To support efficient Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of this large number of sequences, we developed genome-sampler (36), a novel protocol and software for sampling sequences from GISAID across time of sequence acquisition, geographic source of sequence, and SARS-CoV-2 diversity.
As the COVID-19 pandemic swept across the United States, there was great differential impact on local and regional communities.