Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which causes the disease COVID-19, was initially described near the end of 20191 2 and has caused a global pandemic.
3 COVID-19 is characterized predominately by fever, cough, and pneumonia, with some patients presenting with diarrhea and other symptoms.
12 Analyses of ACE2 protein expression by organ system have suggested high levels in epithelia of the lung and small intestine, consistent with presenting symptoms of patients with COVID-19.13
Patients with cancer may be at increased risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection and deleterious outcomes to COVID-19 disease though reports have varied by geography and cancer histology.
In a single hospital study from Wuhan, China, patients with cancer made up 1% of the overall prevalence of COVID-19,19 substantially higher than the overall incidence of cancer in the Chinese population at 0.29%.20
Outcomes to COVID-19 appeared to be worse in patients with cancer with increased intensive care unit admission, mechanical ventilation, and mortality, especially those who had recently received chemotherapy or surgery.
22 Particularly, there has been concern that patients being treated with cancer immunotherapy drugs might be at increased risk given the possible overlapping immune-related toxicities for checkpoint blocking antibodies with the pneumonitis and diarrheal syndromes seen in COVID-19.
This remains an area of open investigation with analyses even from the same institution giving conflicting results about the risk of immunotherapy, notably in advanced lung cancer.25 26 Multiple societies, including the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer, have issued guidance for cancer care during the pandemic as well as the use of immunomodulatory agents such as anti-IL6.27
Several clinical associations have arisen from a smaller series of patients infected with COVID-19.
To the authors’ knowledge, only two tumor types had diabetes status information (pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) and uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma (UCEC)), which was retrieved from clinical XML files on GDC.
Macrophage M1/M2 and T cells were included in the model based on emerging evidence suggesting an important role of macrophage and proinflammatory phenotype39 in COVID-19 disease.
Given the purpose of this analysis was to evaluate the relative importance of features rather than training and validating a predictive model, we did not split samples into training and test sets.
Given the association between COVID-19 disease and various organ-specific symptoms, we investigated the distribution of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression in tumor and normal tissues across 34 tumor types consisting of 15 tissue types (online supplementary tables 1–3).
A full description of each cancer ID is provided in online supplementary table 1. LAML, acute myeloid leukemia.
Several clinical observations on COVID-19 indicated clinical factors such as BMI might be associated with severity.
Last, we examined a public scRNAseq cohort from patients with COVID-19 infection (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3747336) and confirmed that ACE2 was not expressed in immune cells, and TMPRSS2 was present in 6 out of 140,956 cells total by one read count.
The mortality of COVID-19 disease has been substantially greater than that seen with seasonal influenza and led to the identification of or hypothesis that certain clinical factors may be associated with outcomes.
An initial hypothesis when considering the deleterious outcomes for patients with cancer and COVID-19 disease was that cancer tissues themselves might have higher expression of viral entry related genes.
Observing higher ACE2 levels in T cell-inflamed tumors may be relevant to the administration of cancer immunotherapy during the COVID-19 pandemic, especially in patients with tumors of the aerodigestive tract such as head and neck, lung, and colorectal/anal tracts.
49 However, if ACE2 and TMPRSS2 levels are high, making viral infection potentially more likely, concomitant treatment with checkpoint blockade may potentially change antiviral host response50 or possibly obscure rapidly delineation of symptoms such as fatigue, dyspnea, diarrhea,51 and complicate irAE management, especially given emerging evidence that corticosteroids may worsen COVID-19 disease.
To date, it remains unclear whether immune-checkpoint blockade increases risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection or subsequent impact of COVID-19.25 26
Direct infection or dysregulation of immune cell populations is an additional area of concern in patients with cancer and more broadly in infected patients.
COVID-19 can manifest with lymphopenia with some autopsy series suggesting lymph node or splenic atrophy.
Studies have raised the possibility that SARS-CoV-2 infects lymphocytes17 or macrophages,53 leading to COVID-19 associate findings.
In our study, we investigated the expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 across multiple single-cell sequencing databases encompassing nine independent studies.
Additionally, multiple other known pathologies associated with sepsis and extreme illness could explain these lymph node and splenic findings, and few patients with COVID-19 have been documented to have an extreme viremia consistent with what would be required as a prerequisite to such histologic findings.
In our analysis, we found strong correlations of specific bacterial flora and high expression of ACE2 in COVID-19 related organs, including colorectal and kidney.
However, this observation suggests that further investigation of the commensal microbiome in COVID-19 and possibly that bacterial antibiosis related to coronavirus infection might be of relevance in the future.
Rather we sought to investigate factors correlated with viral cell engagement via ACE2 and viral entry via TMPRSS2 as possible associative risk factors that might be entertained on a clinical or translational level when considering risk for patients with cancer and otherwise of COVID-19.
However, we believe our analysis to be the most comprehensive catalog of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 correlates to date (34 tumor types from 15 tissue types across 10 038 subjects including both tumor samples and matched normal tissues as well as scRNAseq databases consisting of patients with cancer and healthy donors).
However, these source data constitute the largest collection of microbiota communities identified from patients with cancer, have previously been used in this manner to build prediction algorithms, and the data were optimized via rigorous methodology to control for noise across the data set.35
We also note that we are unable in this analysis to comment on respiratory or fecal samples from patients infected with COVID-19 and very much look forward to better understanding the functional mechanisms associated with those commensal and pathogenic microbiota related to COVID-19.
Last, our work does not determine a causal role of those correlates in driving response or severity of COVID-19 disease and would require further mechanistic studies as well as prospective clinical trials in patients to further develop or investigate interventional approaches.
Background  Pandemic COVID-19 by severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is facilitated by the ACE2 receptor and protease TMPRSS2.
Modestly sized case series have described clinical factors associated with COVID-19, while ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression analyses have been described in some cell types.
Patients with cancer may have worse outcomes to COVID-19.
We performed an integrated study of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 gene expression across and within organ systems, by normal versus tumor, across several existing databases (The Cancer Genome Atlas, Census of Immune Single Cell Expression Atlas, The Human Cell Landscape, and more).