An outbreak of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) occurred in Wuhan, China in December 2019 and has spread rapidly across the globe.
Several studies have provided evidence that coagulation dysfunction is a major cause of death in severe COVID-19 patients [1], [2], [3], [4].
Awareness regarding thrombotic complications in COVID-19 patients is extremely important for deciding the appropriate course of treatment.
A large number of COVID-19 infected patients have been reported to have other chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, malignancy, respiratory diseases and kidney and liver abnormalities.
Presence of such comorbidities results in increased severity of COVID-19 infection.
Increasing viral load during COVID-19 infection progression leads to cascade of events like inflammation and sepsis releasing inflammatory cytokines which in turn leads to increase in circulating thrombin levels.
Various recent reports have shown increasing concerns of hypercoagulability in COVID-19 patients [14], [15].
Higher incidences of thrombotic complications have been observed in COVID-19 patients admitted in Intensive Care Unit (ICU).
Reports have also shown that coagulopathy in COVID-19 infection results in higher D-dimer levels and subsequently high mortality rates [14] and this mortality is reduced by the use of anticoagulation therapy with heparin [15].
Thus, abnormal coagulation parameters, especially increased D-dimer and FDP levels are associated with deaths in COVID-19 patients.
This study was conducted on 449 severe COVID-19 patients and 99 of them received low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) treatment for 7 days or longer.
They further reported that among patients had higher mortality rates and raised D-dimer levels in absence of heparin treatment and LMWH treatment was associated with better prognosis in severe COVID-19 patients [15].
Researchers further stated that VTE incidence in severe NCP patients was the prime cause of their poor prognosis and significant increase in the D-dimer levels could be a good parameter for identifying high VTE risk amongst COVID-19 patients.
Furthermore, the abnormality in coagulation in COVID-19 differs from what is typically found in other infectious diseases.
In the non-survivors of COVID-19 there was a marked decrease in fibrinogen levels and elevation in FDP.
Most recent reports demonstrate that D dimer levels are significantly increased in COVID-19 non-survivors and thus its prognosis can be predicted based on this parameter [1], [4], [18].
Asakura et al. suggested combination therapy of heparin and Nafamostat against COVID-19 infection [22].
Other recent reports also suggest thromboprophylaxis for all hospitalized COVID-19 patients [23].
During these unforeseen conditions with worldwide pandemic of coronavirus, it is extremely important to consider risk of thrombotic complications while treating an infected COVID-19 patient.
Highlights     •  Coagulation parameters such should be checked at the time of admission of COVID-19 patient.
Background  Recent reports on outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus (COVID-19) have shown its association with abnormal blood clots.
Spread of COVID-19 has been associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and subsequent coagulopathy.
Initially coagulopathy in COVID-19 patients result in significant elevation of D-dimer, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP), and abnormalities in coagulatory parameters, which resulting in formation of thrombus and eventually death.
Methodology  Present report intends to summarize the information of the research reports available so far on the complications of formation of unusal blood clots (thrombosis) during COVID-19 infection and its therapeutic strategies.
Extensive web search was done for various reports associating COVID-19 infection with increased coagulopathy and abnormal coagulatory parameters such as PT, PTT, and platelet counts; along with increased D-dimer and fibrinogen levels.
Results and conclusion  Findings of these research reports were summarized to recommend cautions for clinicians while treating COVID-19 patient.