Editor —The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has spread rapidly since the early cases identified in Wuhan, China.
There were more than 16 341 920 laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases worldwide and 87 245 cases in China as of July 28, 2020.
,
 Among the latter, 19% were severe or critically ill patients who required some form of respiratory support as a result of hypoxaemia or respiratory failure.
Considering the potential of the COVID-19 pandemic to overwhelm healthcare systems, even in developed countries, there is a need to identify subgroups requiring different respiratory support techniques, and those requiring prolonged hospital admission, to inform service provision, allocate scarce medical resources appropriately, and maximise treatment benefits.
Previous studies have reported that older age and male sex were risk factors for poor prognosis in COVID-19 patients, with limited information about the need for respiratory support.
,
 A recent study found high levels of respiratory complications in COVID-19 patients requiring surgery, with an associated high mortality.
We retrospectively reviewed demographic and clinical data available from electronic medical records at a branch of Tongji Hospital (Wuhan, China), a 1050 bed hospital designated for severe and critically ill COVID-19 patients.
Diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 were performed according to the protocol released by China's National Health Commission.
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the Chinese National Health Commission has published and updated ‘Chinese Clinical Guidance for COVID-19 Pneumonia Diagnosis and Treatment’.
A total of 1792 patients hospitalised with COVID-19 between January 27, 2020 and April 20, 2020 were consecutively included.
A strength of the current study is the size of the cohort of COVID-19 patients requiring respiratory support.
Our findings could be a useful supplement to previous studies of morbidity and mortality from COVID-19,
,
,
 to help inform allocation of scarce healthcare resources (especially respiratory support) and mitigation of adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in other countries.
A third of patients with COVID-19 had abnormal pulmonary function at the time of hospital discharge with a higher percentage in older patients.
Our results are consistent with the findings of a previous study in which 84.2% of severe cases with COVID-19 were discharged with impairment of diffusion capacity.
Future studies to address persistent impairment of pulmonary function after COVID-19 and the impact of age are warranted.
It is clear that health and social care provision, for both acute care and post-COVID-19 management, may need to be realigned.
Understanding the factors that impact on research in global challenges such as COVID-19 is important when good quality clinical guidance is urgently needed.