Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is causing huge impacts on health and social care systems globally.
Several health authorities have published their guidelines for COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment including the administration of antimicrobial agents.
Both guidelines for COVID-19 management by the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and by World Health Organization discourage antibiotic therapy or prophylaxis for suspected COVID-19 patients and confirmed patients with mild symptoms, but suggest to prescribe antibiotics for suspicious bacterial infections.
,
 The US National Institutes of Health guideline indicates that no sufficient data supports empirical antibiotic therapy, but acknowledges that some clinicians routinely administer broad-spectrum antibiotics to all patients with moderate or severe hypoxemia.
The latest version of Chinese clinical guideline for COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment published in March 2020 only suggests to avoid inappropriate use of antibacterial drugs, especially the broad-spectrum ones, but without clear explicitness for empirical antibiotic therapy or prophylaxis.
This suggests that the administration of antibiotics on suspected COVID-19 patients is heavily dependent on the judgement and experience of frontline clinicians, especially at the early stage of pandemic outbreak.
Therefore, during the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003 and the more recent Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) outbreak in 2012, most suspected patients were administrated with potent broad-spectrum antibiotics even before the confirmation of the aetiological agents.
,
 This empirical procedure may be applied to treat COVID-19.
In the early outbreaks of COVID-19 in Wuhan, China occurred in late 2019, Chen et al. reported that 77 (71%) of their patients (n = 99) received antibiotic treatment and only 1 (1%) patients developed bacterial co-infection.
For the COVID-19, only 8% of patients with co-infections were reported, although 72% of the patients received antimicrobial therapy.
Lansbury L and colleagues have written to this Journal for their systematically search from literature between 1 January 2020 to 17 April 2020 for studying secondary infections in COVID-19 patients.
From their results, only 7% of hospitalised COVID-19 patients had bacterial co-infections.