In December 2019, a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was identified in Wuhan, China, as the etiologic agent of coronavirus disease (COVID-19); as of May 2020, this virus had spread to more than 187 countries [1,2].
The implications of misunderstanding the real dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic are extremely dangerous.
The GISAID (Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data) database [20] was accessed on March 18, March 25, March 30, and April 24, 2020 (Table S1 in Multimedia Appendix 1 and Table S2 in Multimedia Appendix 2).
Our main analyses compared the March 30 data set with the April 24 data set.
SARS-CoV-2 full genome alignments generated from sequences in GISAID [23] at different time points were analyzed as follows.
However, in a new tree inferred just one week later, when more than 135 new full genome sequences were made available on GISAID [23], the direct link between Germany and Italy in Subclade A disappeared due to additional clustering of previously unsampled sequences from Portugal, Brazil, Wales, and the Netherlands (Figure 2b).
As the number of available genome sequences is rapidly growing, SARS-CoV-2 full genome data sets are steadily showing less than 40% unresolved quartets in the center: 38.6% on March 18 (Figure S1c in Multimedia Appendix 3), 32.3% on March 25 (Figure S1d in Multimedia Appendix 3), 28.9% on March 30th (Figure S1e in Multimedia Appendix 3), and 27.6% on April 24 (Figure S1f in Multimedia Appendix 3).
The phylogenetic signal is increasing in the global alignment; however, likelihood mapping per country using data from countries reporting the highest numbers of cases (United States, Italy, Spain, Germany, and France) indicates that some local data sets lacked sufficient signals up to March 30, 2020 (Figure S6 in Multimedia Appendix 3).
The United States data set comprised mostly sequences collected in Washington State (423/612 genomes, 69.1%).
However, while France and Germany also displayed sufficient temporal signals to allow in-depth molecular epidemiology studies, at least in principle, data sets from the United States (3.9-fold increase on April 24 with respect to March 30), the United Kingdom (5.5-fold increase), and Spain (3.9-fold increase), still showed weak or no temporal signals (Figure S10 in Multimedia Appendix 3) despite the substantial increases in the number of available sequences.
More genome sequences, sampled at different time points and from diverse geographic areas, are becoming available daily; therefore, in-depth Bayesian phylodynamic and phylogeographic analyses of the COVID-19 pandemic will soon be a viable option.
The first step that researchers must take before they complete their phylogenetic studies is determining whether the data set is biased in terms of the number of genomes per given location, host, source, etc.
In this study, we did not test for recombination for the SARS-CoV-2 data set, as absence of recombination in the human lineage has previously been shown [41]; however, because coronaviruses are prone to recombination events, this step should be performed as more sequences become available.
We used maximum likelihood–based methods to assess the presence of sufficient information for robust phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies in several SARS-CoV-2 sequence alignments assembled from GISAID (Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data) data released between March and April 2020.
Although the number of high-quality full genomes is growing daily, and sequence data released in April 2020 contain sufficient phylogenetic information to allow reliable inference of phylogenetic relationships, country-specific SARS-CoV-2 data sets still present severe limitations.