Since its emergence in on December 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic has evolved as a global health emergency [1].
COVID-19 is caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2, a betacoronavirus structurally similar (approximately 79%) to SARS-CoV [2].
Among the first studies to report clinical data on COVID19 was a recent publication by Yang and colleagues [6].
Their study provided the foundation for a hypothesis put forth by Fang and colleagues indicating that diabetic and hypertensive patients exposed to ACE2 inhibitors may be at an increased risk of more severe COVID-19 [7].
Evidence on COVID-19’s interplay with diabetes is only recently emerging, and can currently only be considered within the context of epidemiological studies, determining diabetes mellitus (DM) as frequent comorbidity.
Aside from DM, novel hyperglycemia was recently associated with an increased with worse outcomes in COVID-19 patients, however this association was not independent of other predictors in the multivariate model [17].
Epidemiological associations between COVID-19 and lipid metabolism are currently not possible, since even large scale cohorts do not report on relevant measurements [18].
On the experimental level, lipid metabolism on the cellular level has been proposed as a treatment target for COVID-19; specifically, both interactions between SARS-CoV’s spike protein with lipid rich membrane compartments, as well as the epigenetic modulations in lipid metabolism were considered as the end-point targets for the development of small molecules, aiming to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection [19].
COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2, a betacoronavirus structurally similar to SARS-CoV.
Conversely, currently there are only non-causative, observational evidence of worse outcomes for COVID-19 patients with comorbid diabetes or hyperglycemia.
No study has reported on the lipid profiles of COVID-19 patients; however, lipid-targeting molecules have been proposed as agents against SARS-CoV-2.
Future studies, reporting on lipid and glucose metabolism of COVID-19 patients could help elucidate the disease’s seculae and aid drug design.