The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak occurred in December 2019 and in the following months this epidemic was declared as a global health emergency by the World Health Organization (WHO) with more than 600 thousand deaths reported till date [1].
Similar to SARS-CoV and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), severe symptoms such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiple organ failure were observed in nearly 20% patients suffering from COVID-19 infection [2].
Recently, it has also been reported as a receptor for the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 and plays pivotal roles during the COVID-19 infection [4].
Notably, COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms also seem to suffer from various other health conditions including cardiovascular disease (CVD), hypertension and diabetes [5].
Thus, it is likely that the extent of COVID-19 infection gets more pronounced by ACE2 in patients with comorbidities, which in turn may cause additional myocardial damage.
In our pervious review, we summarized the state of art of investigation and potential therapeutic strategies for COVID-19 patients with cardiac disease [8].
In this study, we investigate several in-silico identified miRNAs which could regulate ACE2 in vitro and therefore provide a potential strategy to develop novel therapeutic candidates for COVID-19.
As one of the main receptors of SARS-CoV-2 [4], ACE2 is considered as a potential target for COVID-19 prevention.
Another multi-organ autopsy study of COVID-19 patients revealed the presence of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in the heart tissue [11].
To fight the COVID-19 pandemic in the absence of vaccines, it is necessary to identify promising drugs which act against SARS-CoV-2 infection in cardiomyocytes and such in vitro translational platforms can immensely aid in this process.
Vaccine is one of the most efficient tools to prevent COVID-19.
By April 2020, 115 vaccine candidates for COVID-19 were reported, out of which 73 targets were selected for pre-clinical investigation.
Of note, patients with pre-existing CVDs are more likely to suffer from severe symptoms of COVID-19 [5].
However, the contradicting effects of ACE2 in CVDs and COVID-19 infection should be considered carefully.
Thus, it is a big challenge to ascertain the therapeutic time window for targeting ACE2 in COVID-19 patients with CVDs.
Nevertheless, a miR-200c based therapy may help to bridge the time till an effective COVID-19 vaccine is available to the world.
The World Health Organization (WHO) declared coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) as a public health emergency of international concern as more than 15 million cases were reported by 24th July 2020.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a COVID-19 entry receptor regulating host cell infection.
We report the first miRNA candidate that can target ACE2 in cardiomyocytes and thus may be exploited as a preventive strategy to treat cardiovascular complications of COVID-19.