The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, and our knowledge about the virus, has exponentially grown since media reports of a cluster of acute respiratory infections in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, were first reported in December 2019 [1].
The demanding pace and large volume of COVID-19 science generated in the last 3 months, however, has made timely scientific communication through the conventional route of published biomedical journals at best challenging, and at worst obsolete.
We propose that Twitter has played a fundamental—but often precarious—role in permitting real-time global communication between scientists during the COVID-19 epidemic, on a scale not seen before.
This discussion also serves as a succinct primer on some of the pivotal epidemiological analyses (and their communication) during the early phases of the COVID-19 outbreak, as seen through the lens of a Twitter feed.
Similarly, concerns of malignant misinformation about COVID-19 deliberately spread through this medium are beyond the scope of this commentary [8].
As with other outbreaks, early estimation of epidemic parameters during the first month of the COVID-19 epidemic has been critical to predict the epidemic trajectory and inform decision making.
Indeed, such open-source line-list data remain more comprehensive than what is currently published by some other countries now experiencing major COVID-19 epidemics.
Accurate approximation and interpretation of the COVID-19 case-fatality ratio (CFR) has been critical for resource planning and risk messaging.
These discussion points were vital to frame any early comparisons of COVID-19 morbidity and mortality with that of seasonal or pandemic influenza [33–35].
It is important to acknowledge, however, the continued importance of rigorously peer-reviewed journal publications of COVID-19 clinical and epidemiological characteristics, especially when accompanied by expert editorials, and particularly given the exponential rise of preprint publications, which may vary in quality [36].
Twitter has and continues to serve as a valuable medium to discuss the caveats and future directions in applying infectious disease models in COVID-19 decision making [41–44].
Still, Twitter remains the double-edged sword of rapid scientific communication during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
The human and social toll of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has already spurred several major public health “lessons learned,” and the theme of effective and responsible scientific communication is among them.
We propose that Twitter has played a fundamental—but often precarious—role in permitting real-time global communication between scientists during the COVID-19 epidemic, on a scale not seen before.
This discussion also serves as a succinct primer on some of the pivotal epidemiological analyses (and their communication) during the early phases of the COVID-19 outbreak, as seen through the lens of a Twitter feed.
Twitter remains the double-edged sword of rapid scientific communication during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.