The resultant coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) manifests predominantly symptoms in the lower respiratory system, typically presented as viral pneumonia.
Suspected COVID‐19 patients who had documented history of exposure and exhibited symptoms, but did not have positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test results, were generally self‐quarantined.
Some patients had a contact history with a confirmed COVID‐19 patient but did not have typical viral pneumonia symptoms or fever, and so did not get selected for PCR testing.
Given the rapidly growing pandemic and the overwhelmed medical system, a number of patients with typical COVID‐19 symptoms could not be hospitalized, even if they were tested positive by PCR.
The combination of the false negative rate of PCR testing, the biased pre‐screening procedure for patients to get tested, and hospital space limitation results in an increasing number of nonhospitalized COVID‐19 patients.
Most of the prescribed alternative medicines are, however, neither specific nor highly effective for COVID‐19 treatment.
The outbreak of COVID‐19 in Wuhan, China, in January 2020, was the first strike on public health system by SARS‐CoV‐2.
Patients infected with COVID‐19 had a high chance of developing severe pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (16%‐17%) and the mortality rate was high (4.3%‐11%).
, 
, 
, 
 Hospitalization became the only possible way for severe COVID‐19 patients to receive medical supports and treatment against symptoms.
A number of patients in Wuhan had documented contact histories with confirmed COVID‐19 patients and also showed respiratory symptoms, however unfortunately, their upper respiratory system did not have viral loads that were high enough to pass the PCR test threshold, and so they did not have a positive PCR test result to qualify for hospitalization in January and early February in Wuhan.
Our medical team tracked and helped treat a number of these nonhospitalized COVID‐19 patients.
On Feb 2nd (day 22), the patient's fingertip oxygen saturation dropped to 93% (comparable to severe COVID‐19 patients) and routine blood examination showed elevated level of C‐reactive protein (50.02 in patient, vs normal ranges at 0‐4) (Table 1).
Given the patient's history of contact with confirmed COVID‐19 patients and her typical COVID‐19 symptoms, the most possible infection at the time was SARS‐CoV‐2.
During late January and early February, the protocol for COVID‐19 clinical diagnosis and patient admission used in China required a confirmation of infection by RT‐PCR positive result, and thus this patient was not eligible for hospitalization at that moment.
This patient with suspected COVID‐19 was sent home for self‐quarantine.
Given that the medicines prescribed in the hospital failed to relieve the patient's symptoms and started to trigger side effects, and that the patient was not eligible for COVID‐19 treatment in the hospital, all prescribed medicines were discontinued.
Thus far for COVID‐19, there are no pharmacological treatment regimens of proven efficacy.
Immunopathology is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in severe COVID‐19 patients.
There is an urgent need for treatment regimens that can manage inflammation and tissue damages associated with severe COVID‐19, to reduce mortality and buy time for the immune system to clear the virus from the patients.
During the initial COVID‐19 outbreak in Wuhan, corticosteroid has been used in hospitals to suppress lung inflammation in COVID‐19 patients,
 however, multiple side effects have been observed.
Here we report DG, a marketed Chinese traditional medicine with a steroid‐like effect, in combination with VC as a potential anti‐inflammatory treatment to relieve severe symptoms from COVID‐19.
Our article here reports a case of nonhospital COVID‐19 that showed significantly positive responses to DG treatment.
Although the exact functions of DG against SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and the associated immunopathology await further investigations, it is possible that the therapeutic effects of DG observed in this severe COVID‐19 patient were a combinatory result of the antiviral and anti‐inflammatory effects of DG in the respiratory and neurological systems.
Given these encouraging pharmacological effects and the demonstrated safety, as well as the low cost and wide availability of DG and VC, we suggest that a combination of these might be a good candidate for alternative medicine against COVID‐19.
Implementation of this treatment regimen might worth more attention, and further investigations in clinical trials can be considered to validate its effects in relieving severe symptoms and reducing mortality of COVID‐19 in a larger cohort.
For suspected COVID‐19 patients who cannot be hospitalized and have no venues for COVID‐19 specific prescriptions, we suggest that the combination of DG and VC may be a promising candidate as an alternative medicine to help relieve severe symptoms of COVID‐19 during self‐quarantine.
Abstract  SARS‐CoV‐2 is highly infectious, and infection by this virus results in COVID‐19, manifesting predominantly symptoms in the lower respiratory system.
Suspected COVID‐19 patients who had a documented history of exposure and exhibited symptoms, but did not have positive PCR test results, were generally self‐quarantined with prescriptions aiming to help attenuate their symptoms.
These prescriptions are however neither specific nor highly effective for COVID‐19 treatment.
We report here a case of severe COVID‐19 that never had a positive PCR test result during disease progression but was confirmed with antibody test post recovery.
This patient went through severe COVID‐19 but eventually recovered upon the implementation of this treatment regimen, suggesting potential therapeutic effects of DG as alternative medicine to help relieve COVID‐19 symptoms.
We report here a case of severe COVID‐19, in which diammonium glycyrrhizinate and vitamin C were used as alternative medicine to help relieve COVID‐19 symptoms.