Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), is now one of the deadliest pandemics in modern history.
The mode of infection of COVID-19 is thought to be direct entry of the SARS-CoV-2 virus into cells via the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which is expressed predominantly in the lungs but also throughout the cardiovascular system (1).
Thus, although the most virulent manifestation of COVID-19 is acute respiratory distress syndrome, reports from Europe and China have also demonstrated cardiac injury reflected through elevated troponin concentrations among infected patients (2, 3, 4, 5).
In these limited case series, troponin elevation was more common in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease (CVD) and, when present, was associated with higher rates of adverse outcomes in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (6).
During the study period, 3,069 COVID-19 positive patients were hospitalized at 1 of 5 MSHS New York City hospitals.
Of 2,736 COVID-19 patients included in our study, 506 (18.5%) died, 1,132 (41.4%) were discharged, and 1,098 (40.1%) remained hospitalized at the time of data freeze for this report.
Although pulmonary manifestations are its most common consequence, COVID-19 causes systemic inflammation with varying presentations of cardiac involvement as well (10).
In this multihospital retrospective cohort study of nearly 3,000 patients, we demonstrate the following observations: 1) myocardial injury is common among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 but is more often mild, associated with low-level elevation in troponin concentration; 2) more significant myocardial injury may be associated with more than a tripling in risk of mortality; and 3) COVID-19 patients with a history of CVD are more likely to experience myocardial injury than patients without CVD but without obvious corroborating evidence for primary acute myocardial infarction (Central Illustration
).
Despite several reports of COVID-19 associated myocarditis, to date, no case has demonstrated COVID-19 genome in cardiac tissue on biopsy or autopsy accompanied by troponin elevation consistent with criteria used to diagnose myocarditis (3, 4, 5,14, 15, 16).
Other postulated mechanisms by which COVID-19 leads to cardiovascular morbidity include direct myocardial injury as a result of the inflammatory cascade or cytokine release, microvascular damage due to disseminated intravascular coagulation and thrombosis, direct entry of SARS-CoV-2 into myocardial cells via binding to ACE2 receptors, hypoxemia combined with increased metabolic demands of acute illness leading to myocardial injury akin to type 2 myocardial infarction, and finally, acute coronary syndrome from acute inflammation-triggered destabilization of atheromas (17, 18, 19).
In a recent case series of 18 patients with COVID-19 infection and ST-segment elevation on electrocardiogram, 10 were deemed to have noncoronary myocardial injury by virtue of nonobstructive disease on coronary angiography and/or normal wall motion on echocardiography (20).
Despite lower troponin concentrations in this group, 9 died as opposed to 4 of 8 in the ST-segment elevation MI group, which may suggest higher mortality associated with nonischemic mediated myocardial injury in the setting of COVID-19; however, more data are needed.
The benefit of statins in the setting of myocardial injury is well established (27, 28, 29), yet whether statins confer an anti-inflammatory effect or allow for amelioration of endothelial dysfunction in COVID-19 have not been elucidated.
Interestingly, higher BMI was associated with increased mortality in the setting of COVID-19 among our cohort, consistent with a prior report (30).
The degree of myocardial injury, as reflected by troponin elevation, and associated outcomes among U.S. hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) are unknown.
The purpose of this study was to describe the degree of myocardial injury and associated outcomes in a large hospitalized cohort with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19.
Methods  Patients with COVID-19 admitted to 1 of 5 Mount Sinai Health System hospitals in New York City between February 27, 2020, and April 12, 2020, with troponin-I (normal value <0.03 ng/ml) measured within 24 h of admission were included (n = 2,736).
Conclusions  Myocardial injury is prevalent among patients hospitalized with COVID-19; however, troponin concentrations were generally present at low levels.
Troponin elevation among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 is associated with higher risk of mortality.