After multiple sample collections and laboratory analyses, the pathogen was identified as a novel coronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 by the International Committee of Taxonomy of Viruses [1], and the disease was named coronavirus disease (COVID-19) by the World Health Organization on February 11, 2020 [2].
Other countries such as Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Singapore, and the United States also reported COVID-19 cases in their countries [4].
The rapid spread of COVID-19 has already caused great public attention and many heated discussions, and the Chinese mass media have been reporting relevant information about the virus and the outbreak.
Data from Chinese news and related articles were collected from the WiseSearch database [6].
The WiseSearch database is one of the most reputable, ever-growing Chinese media content databases, containing the news and article data from more than 1500 print media sources and over 10,000 internet media sources.
It is famous for its reproducibility, timeliness, great coverage, and high data integrity compared with the other database [7].
The news and article data in the WiseSearch database are updated in a timely manner [6].
We also built a document-term matrix and used term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF) to process the data.
TF–IDF is a numerical statistic that is used to reflect the importance of a word to an article in a corpus [19].
To seek a suitable LDA topic number and the explanations to investigate the relationship between the COVID-19 crisis and news reports, we conducted multiple studies.
We selected topic 1 and the system visualized the word frequency distribution relative to the full corpus.
The increase in the number of cases on February 12 and 13, 2020, was due to the updated diagnosis criteria in the COVID-19 protocol (fifth version) [28].
University affinitive hospitals and university alumni associations participated actively in the fight against COVID-19.
The COVID-19 crisis has aroused great public concern in China and around the world.
Topic modeling provides an alternative perspective to investigate the relationship between media reports and the COVID-19 outbreak.
Although several COVID-19 cases were found in December 2019, we observed few news reports about them, showing that the press media did not focus on this disease at that time.
These two themes indicate that the mass media adopts a people-oriented principle when reporting on the COVID-19 crisis, contributing to the warm society phenomenon.
This study is the first step to understanding the Chinese mass media’s role during the COVID-19 crisis.
First, we included a large number of Chinese news articles about COVID-19 from the WiseSearch mass media database, which only covers text news articles.
Some relative studies introduced sentiment analysis to investigate the emotional differences in the message content [35]; it would be valuable if we could also apply sentiment analysis to supervise the news and investigate the public’s reaction to news related to COVID-19.
In December 2019, a few coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases were first reported in Wuhan, Hubei, China.
As this dreadful disease spreads rapidly, the mass media has been active in community education on COVID-19 by delivering health information about this novel coronavirus, such as its pathogenesis, spread, prevention, and containment.
The aim of this study was to collect media reports on COVID-19 and investigate the patterns of media-directed health communications as well as the role of the media in this ongoing COVID-19 crisis in China.
We adopted the WiseSearch database to extract related news articles about the coronavirus from major press media between January 1, 2020, and February 20, 2020.
Comparing the number of articles for each day and the outbreak development, we noted that mass media news reports in China lagged behind the development of COVID-19.
The COVID-19 crisis has become a worldwide issue, and society has become concerned about donations and support as well as mental health among others.
We recommend that future work addresses the mass media’s actual impact on readers during the COVID-19 crisis through sentiment analysis of news data.