Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2), a newly discovered coronavirus with a size of 60–140 nm, located in the SARB
subgene of the Betacoronavirus family [1].
As on 2:00am CEST, 18 April 2020, there have
been 2,160,207 confirmed cases of COVID-19, including 146,088 deaths globally [3].
According to an analysis of
44,672 confirmed cases out of 72,314 reported cases by the Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), the crude case fatality rate of the patients with severe
COVID-19 reached 49%.
No vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 has been published publicly, and there was no medication specific
for the treatment of COVID-19 so far [6].
It was
proved that Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) could obviously shorten fever duration and
symptomatic relief of the patients with severe COVID-19 [7–9].
Up to now, ‘three medicines and three formulas’
have been proven effective in treating the COVID-19.
Among them, Huashi Baidu formula
(HSBDF) was used as an auxiliary medicine for the treatment of patients with severe
COVID-19.
According to the theory of TCM, the core pathogenesis of COVID-19 was the wet epidemic
caused by the cold and humidity outside the lung and spleen, which was transformed into heat
and lead to heat stagnation due to the imbalance of qi mechanism and endogenous stagnated
heat [11].
The combination of
SARS-CoV-2 and ACE2 was the main cause of COVID-19.
The protein targets associated with active compounds were retrieved from the TCMSP
database (http://lsp.nwsuaf.edu.cn/tcmsp.php), which provided information of 6511 drug
molecules and 3987 targets as well as the interactions between them [19].
As an authoritative database of protein sequences, UniProt
Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) comprised 54,247,468 sequence items [24].
The targets, including the gene names and gene ID, were
further extracted using UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org).
Visual component–target network was established based on aforementioned data sets through
Cytoscape 3.7.2 (http://www.cytoscape.org/) to reflect the complex relationships between
active compounds and their potential targets [25].
GeneCards database (https://www.genecards.org/) and Therapeutic Target Database (TTD, https://db.idrblab.org/ttd/) were used to gather the information on
COVID-19-associated target genes [28].
GeneCards is a comprehensive database of functions involving proteomics, genomics, and
transcriptomics [29].
The keywords ‘novel
coronavirus pneumonia,’ ‘cough,’ and ‘fever’ were utilized to screen the
COVID-19-associated targets.
The names of targets were collected from TTD, which provided
information about the therapeutic protein targets, the corresponding ID of each targets
and the targeted disease.
The common targets of HSBDF and COVID-19 were then gathered as
the core targets of HSBDF for COVID-19.
A total of 222 active compounds were retrieved in TCMSP database.
A total of 216 possible targets of COVID-19 were screened through ‘novel coronavirus
pneumonia,’ ‘cough,’ and ‘fever.’
The
network contained a total of 53 nodes, which were the core targets of HSBDF in the
treatment of COVID-19.
Since both SARS and COVID-19 were
caused via binding S-protein to ACE2 [37,38], quercetin acted as
a competitive antagonist to inhibit infection of SARS-CoV-2.
Abstract   Purpose  Huashi Baidu formula (HSBDF) was developed to treat the patients with severe COVID-19 in China.
All the components of HSBDF were retrieved from the pharmacology database of TCM system.
The genes corresponding to the targets were retrieved using UniProt and GeneCards database.
The target protein–protein interaction network was built using STRING database.
Conclusion  Baicalein and quercetin in HSBDF may regulate multiple signaling pathways through ACE2, which might play a therapeutic role on COVID-19.