Because the disease, COVID-19, spread across China and beyond (Phan, 2020), WHO was obliged to declare as pandemic on March 11 and reported a total of confirmed 4,617,176 cases and 307,988 deaths until May 15, 22:41 GMT (WHO, 2020).
Therefore, this study was conducted to unfold SARS-CoV-2 virus genome to identify regulatory elements such as CpG islands, transcription factors (TFs) and their corresponding binding sites (TFBSs) involved in the regulation of its gene expression so that it provide baseline information for designing COVID-19 disease control strategy and for further detail molecular characterization of SARS-CoV-2 virus genome.
In this analysis all eleven SARS-CoV-2 gene coding sequences, available in NCBI database with the start codon at the beginning of the sequence and only functional genes (protein coding) were considered.
The output of TOMTOM includes LOGOS representing the alignment of the candidate motif and TF with the p-value and q-value (a measure of false discovery rate) of the match, and links back to the parent transcription database for more detailed information about it (Bailey et al., 2006; Bailey et al., 2009).
The GOMO output is HTML and shows the GO terms, GO name and Gene ID.
Buttons on the GOMO HTML output allow one or all of the Gene ID to be forwarded for further analysis, to ascertain which molecular and biological functions are associated with the candidate motif.
MVI was compared to registered motifs in publically available databases such as Prokaryote DNA to see if they are similar to known regulatory motifs for transcription factor using the TOMTOM web application (Reese, 2001).
The output from TOMTOM also links the parent TF database for more detail information for activation, repression or dual regulatory effects on the matched motif.
As a result, MVI matched with 10 out of 84 known motifs found in the databases.
As we tried to check the role of CRP TFs in UniProt protein database, they can act as an activator, repressor, co-activator or co-repressor in Escherichia coli and Yersinia pestis where similar function was revealed for CcpA transcription factor in Lactococcus lactis and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
In UniProt protein database LexA transcription factor is also named as LexA repressor functioning as a repressor of a number of genes in bacteria such as Rhizobium meliloti.
But, further investigation about ArcA transcription factor from UniProt protein data base revealed it is a protein with two component signal transduction system controlling aerobic respiration response regulator with gene ontology (molecular function) of mainly serving as DNA-binding transcription activator activity in bacteria.
SARS-CoV-2 is a new virus responsible for an outbreak of respiratory illness known as COVID-19, which has spread to several countries around the world and a global effort is being undertaken to characterize the molecular features and evolutionary origins of this virus.
For this purpose, we first computationally surveyed all SARS-CoV-2 virus genes with the open reading frames from NCBI database and found eleven sequences to accomplish the mentioned features by using bioinformatics tools.
Highlights     •  Computationally surveyed all SARS-CoV-2 genes with the open reading frames from NCBI database showed eleven gene sequences    •