COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) has become a global pandemic, fueled by the rapid spread of the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2), a positive-strand RNA virus (Wu et al., 2020a; Sanche et al., 2020).
While large-scale comparisons are not currently feasible due to lack of datasets measuring viral transcript localization, this example provides some reassurance that RNA-GPS’ predicted viral residencies are reasonable.
(B) To evaluate the effect of the potentially noisy mitochondrial examples in our APEX-seq training set on predicted SARS-CoV-2 residencies, we trained a “denoised” variant of RNA-GPS on a subsetted dataset that excludes these examples.
For additional analysis of the mitochondrial dataset and predictions, see Figure S1.
To ensure that our results have not been driven by potentially noisy data in this regime, we excluded nuclear-encoded, “noncanonical” mitochondrial matrix transcripts with relatively low APEX-seq enrichment signal (lowest 20% of log-fold-change enrichment scores) and retrained RNA-GPS on this adjusted dataset.
This “denoised” model recapitulates the same SARS-CoV-2 residency toward the mitochondrial matrix and nucleolus (Figure 2B), suggesting that our predictions are robust to potential noise in the training data.
We used “RNA subcellular residency” rather than “RNA localization” to describe RNA-GPS prediction results, as this is more reflective of the underlying APEX-seq training data and its inherent differences compared with viral transcripts.
SARS-CoV-2 viral genomes were programmatically queried from the NCBI GenBank online database using the BioPython library’s Entrez module (Cock et al., 2009).
The model was implemented in PyTorch and was trained to minimize a binary cross-entropy loss using the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with a batch size of 1, with early stopping based on validation set area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC).
Localization within this dataset is expressed as an enrichment score compared to the rest of the cell.
As is conventional, the validation set was used for hyperparameter tuning and model architecture tuning.
We use a database of 102 RNA binding protein binding motifs (Ray et al., 2013).
Genes were compared in an overrepresentation test against a reference list of all genes in the Homo sapiens database using Fisher’s Exact test, with false discovery rate correction.