The COVID-19 pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus is of particular concern for people with rheumatic disease or those who are immunosuppressed.
In general, immunosuppression and the presence of comorbidities are associated with an increased risk of serious infection in people with rheumatic diseases1 therefore, people with rheumatic disease may be at higher risk for a more severe course with COVID-19, including hospitalisation, complications and death.
Importantly, some medications used to treat rheumatic diseases, such as hydroxychloroquine and interleukin-6 (IL-6) inhibitors, are being studied for the prevention and/or treatment of COVID-19 and its complications including cytokine-storm.
At present, the implications of COVID-19 for people living with rheumatic diseases remain poorly understood.
To address this knowledge gap, a global network of rheumatologists, scientists and patients developed a physician-reported case registry of people with rheumatic diseases diagnosed with COVID-19.5 6
This report aims to (1) describe the demographic and clinical characteristics of the first 600 patients submitted to the COVID-19 Global Rheumatology Alliance (C19-GRA) physician registry and (2) identify factors associated with hospitalisation for COVID-19 in this population.
5–7 Briefly, C19-GRA data regarding individuals with rheumatic diseases diagnosed with COVID-19 are captured from rheumatology physicians via two parallel international data entry portals for regulatory reasons: one limited to European countries (eular.org/eular_covid19_database.cfm; hosted by The University of Manchester, UK) and a second for all other sites (rheum-covid.org/provider-global/; hosted by the University of California, San Francisco, California, USA).
COVID-19 diagnoses were predominately made through PCR testing (437, 73%), followed by laboratory assay of unknown type (58, 10%), CT scan (42, 7%) or other (31, 5%) (individuals could be tested using more than one method).
The median number of days from COVID-19 symptom onset to resolution or death was 13 (IQR: 8–17).
NSAID use was reported less frequently among hospitalised patients than non-hospitalised patients (16% vs 25%, p=0.02), while there was a higher proportion of patients receiving high doses of glucocorticoids among those who were hospitalised than not hospitalised (16% vs 7% for doses ≥10 mg/day, p=0.01).
Treatment with b/tsDMARD monotherapy just prior to COVID-19 diagnosis was significantly associated with a lower odds of hospitalisation compared with no DMARD therapy (OR=0.46, 95% CI 0.22 to 0.93; p=0.03).
We found no significant association between antimalarial therapy and hospitalisation (OR=0.94, 95% CI 0.57 to 1.57; p=0.82) after adjusting for sex, age over 65 years, rheumatic disease, smoking status, comorbidities, other csDMARD monotherapy, b/tsDMARD monotherapy, csDMARD-b/tsDMARD combination therapy (excluding antimalarials), NSAID use and glucocorticoid dose.
A significant inverse association between any anti-TNF therapy and hospitalisation was found (OR=0.40, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.81; p=0.01), after controlling for sex, age over 65 years, rheumatic disease, smoking, comorbidities, csDMARD monotherapy, other b/tsDMARD monotherapy, csDMARD-b/tsDMARD combination therapy (excluding anti-TNF), NSAID use and glucocorticoid dose.
Prior to this report, there had been several small case series of COVID-19 in patients with rheumatic disease reported from Europe.
With few exceptions,12 13 prior large descriptive studies of patients with COVID-19 from China, Europe and the USA have not included rheumatic disease in their baseline comorbidities.
These studies have not allowed for further inference on the characteristics of patients with rheumatic disease and their associations with COVID-19 severity.
In accordance with previous studies of COVID-19 in different populations, we found that patients with comorbidities such as hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetes had higher odds of hospitalisation.
The use of hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19, which was based on in vitro studies, has had mixed results.
23 24 Two randomised controlled trials of hydroxychloroquine had conflicting findings.25 26 A phase IIb randomised controlled trial comparing two doses of chloroquine among patients hospitalised with COVID-19 with historical controls from Wuhan detected a negative safety signal—QTc prolongation—but no clinical benefit.
We also did not detect a significant association between NSAID use and hospitalisation in adjusted analyses.
Although no prior data in patients with COVID-19 have supported a deleterious effect of NSAIDs on clinical outcomes, early reports cautioned against the use of NSAIDs suggesting harm when used during the clinical course of COVID-19.30
These observations, while anecdotal, may also relate to confounding by indication, since NSAIDs are also often sold over-the-counter and may not be documented in hospital records with the same accuracy as prescription medications, leading to a reporting bias.
Although we caution against causal inference regarding drug effects given significant potential for residual confounding in our study, we also note that there is biological plausibility for the potential benefit of biologic medications in treating COVID-19, as evidenced by those with more severe disease having higher levels of cytokines, including IL-6 and TNF.31 32 The use of IL-6 inhibitors is being investigated for COVID-19, particularly in cases complicated by aberrant inflammatory responses or ‘cytokine storm’.
33 34 Anti-TNFs have also been suggested as a potential therapy in COVID-19, but this has been based solely on preclinical data.35 Randomised, placebo-controlled trials are needed to clarify potential benefits or harms of biologic therapies in treating COVID-19.
Strengths of our study include the first large analysis of patients with rheumatic diseases and COVID-19.
The registry collects information on specific rheumatic disease diagnoses, which to date have not been captured in large, published case series of COVID-19.15
This series of cases demonstrates that the majority of patients with rheumatic diseases captured in our registry recover from COVID-19.
Results support the guidance issued by the American College of Rheumatology and the European League Against Rheumatism, which suggest continuing rheumatic medications in the absence of COVID-19 infection or SARS-CoV-2 exposure.36 37
Objectives  COVID-19 outcomes in people with rheumatic diseases remain poorly understood.
The aim was to examine demographic and clinical factors associated with COVID-19 hospitalisation status in people with rheumatic disease.
Methods  Case series of individuals with rheumatic disease and COVID-19 from the COVID-19 Global Rheumatology Alliance registry: 24 March 2020 to 20 April 2020.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use was not associated with hospitalisation status (OR 0.64, 95% CI 0.39 to 1.06).
Neither exposure to DMARDs nor NSAIDs were associated with increased odds of hospitalisation.