Emerging epidemiological studies have brought the attentions towards liver injury and liver impairment as a potential outcome of COVID19 infection.
Similarly, in COVID-19, more than half of patients developed abnormal levels of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (Zhang et al. 2020).
Moreover, higher liver dysfunction was observed with more severe presentations of COVID-19 and more admission to intensive care units (Guan et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020).
In the COVID-19, the resulting hepatic dysfunction is accompanied by abnormal coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways leading to worse outcomes (Tang et al. 2020; Thachil et al. 2020).
Liver impairment during COVID-19 infection could be due to several factors including the direct infection of liver cells with SARS-CoV-2 (Wang et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2020), cytokine storm and inflammation, and drug-induced toxicity.
Understanding that may reflect how such medications may affect the level of infectivity and permissibility of the liver following COVID-19 infection (Boeckmans et al. 2020).
Not all medications present in Fig. 1b were available in this dataset.
Within the analgesics, acetaminophen revealed a dose-dependent reduction in expression level of ACE2, while the effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) ranged between no expression change with ibuprofen and meloxicam and mixed effect of decreased ACE2 and increased TMPRSS2 expressions with diclofenac, naproxen, and nimesulide (Fig. 1b; Supplementary Table 1).
Our results are based on public gene expression datasets and thus they may or may not reflect changes in protein expression.
Although the increased risk of developing severe COVID-19 infections should not be correlated solely with the use of medications, data presented here suggest that we should be vigilant about the potential medication effects.
Publicly available gene expression datasets available via Toxicogenomics Project-Genomics Assisted Toxicity Evaluation System (Open TG-GATEs) (Igarashi et al. 2015), National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus (NCIB GEO, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) and the European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI, https://www.ebi.ac.uk) were used.
Medication treatments were extracted from TG-GATEs database using the high and middle concentrations.
The data for chloroquine derivative medication were extracted from the GSE30351 dataset.
The rat in-invitro treatments were obtained from DrugMatrix toxicogenomic database (GSE57805).
Emerging epidemiological studies brought the attentions towards liver injury and impairment as a potential outcome of COVID19.
Understanding that may reflect how such medications may affect the level of infectivity and permissibility of the liver following COVID-19.
Using transcriptomic datasets, Toxicogenomic Project-Genomics Assisted Toxicity Evaluation System (Open TG-GATEs) and GSE30351, we have tested the ability of ninety common medications to regulate COVID-19 receptors expression in human primary hepatocytes.
To confirm the observed effects on primary human hepatocytes, rat hepatocyte treatments data was obtained from DrugMatrix toxicogenomic database (GSE57805), which showed a similar ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression pattern.
More research is needed to determine the effect of different medications on COVID-19 receptors.