As of April 30th, 2020 there were approximately 3.1 M confirmed cases of COVID-19 worldwide and more than 217.000 infection-related deaths.
Therefore, in our study, CFR was calculated as the ratio between the death cases due to COVID-19, over the total number of SARS-CoV-2 reported cases 14 days before, as previously described [11].
Mortality calculations during the epidemics are difficult, mostly due to calculation biases: during the initial period of the epidemic, many patients were diagnosed with COVID-19 only after developing critical illness or even at the time of death, whereas asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic patients were untested, leading to an underestimation of the denominator [11].
We chose to analyze the Country-specific data relative to the number of COVID-19 deaths in April 2020, when some of the initial biases were likely attenuated, using the method described [11].
However, even if the daily number of death patients divided per age is available for each Country, we could not provide in this study a further normalization of the CFR taking into account patients age, since a similar daily database of infected people divided per age is not publicly available.
A database of 487 genome sequences isolated from patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Italy, Spain, Germany, France, UK, Sweden and USA has been randomly collected from the GISAID database, aligned and compared to the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome.
The only significant difference is the newly emerged mutation nt24368, that in our database was detected only in the genomes analyzed in Sweden.
Background  Severe acute respiratory syndrome CoV-2 (SARS-CoV-2) caused the first coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China and has become a public health emergency of international concern.
Case fatality rate was calculated as the ratio between the death cases due to COVID-19, over the total number of SARS-CoV-2 reported cases 14 days before.
We also analyzed 487 genomic sequences from the GISAID database derived from patients infected by SARS-CoV-2 from January 2020 to April 2020 in Italy, Spain, Germany, France, Sweden, UK and USA.
SARS-CoV-2 reference genome was obtained from the GenBank database (NC_045512.2).
We calculated case fatality rates by dividing the death number of a specific day by the number of patients with confirmed COVID-19 infection observed 14 days before and normalized by a ρ factor which takes into account the diagnostic PCR testing capability of each Country and the number of positive cases detected.
Data available in the GISAID database and in a public repository that does not issue datasets with DOIs.