This novel strain of coronavirus has been identified as the causative agent for the epidemic of acute respiratory distress syndrome (also referred to as coronavirus disease 2019 [COVID-19]) in Wuhan, China.1, 2, 3 Since then, the COVID-19 outbreak has rapidly swept all of the provinces of China and has disseminated globally to 216 countries and territories through travel.
COVID-19 is a potential zoonotic disease with a low to moderate mortality rate (2%–5%) and is primarily transmitted through droplet and direct contact with infected individuals or incubation carriers.
COVID-19 patients develop dynamic innate and adaptive immune responses to SARS-CoV-2.7, 8, 9 SARS-CoV-2 has a preferential tropism for airway epithelial cells mediated through the accessibility of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor.10, 11, 12, 13 The common clinical manifestations of fever and cough in conjunction with laboratory results of progressively increasing neutrophil counts and leukocytopenia in serum samples taken from COVID-19 patients at various stages of the illness indicate uncontrolled neutrophil extravasation and activation.
A large number of macrophages and neutrophils were found in alveolar cavities in COVID-19 fatalities, suggesting their roles in cytokine storms.
While uncontrolled neutrophil activity and aberrant cytokine response contribute to SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis in COVID-19, how SARS-CoV-2 causes these immunological changes, especially the enhancement of neutrophil chemotaxis and activation, remains largely undetermined.
The disruption of these intraviral PPIs by repurposing small molecule or peptide drugs that target specific epitopes can be a treatment strategy against COVID-19.
SARS-CoV-2 infection can lead to imbalanced host immune responses such as diminished type I and type III interferon (IFN) signaling, as well as strong chemotactic and inflammatory response in infected cell lines, animal models, and COVID-19 patients,
,
,
 Nsp10 may regulate IL-8 levels by targeting NKRF and shapes the unique immune signature in COVID-19.
To elucidate the mechanism and effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients, we determined the global proteome profile changes in PBMCs samples taken from healthy donors compared with PBMCs collected from COVID-19 patients with mild or severe symptoms.
The PBMC samples were obtained from the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center and include 6 healthy donors, 22 COVID-19 patients with mild symptoms (COVID-19-MS), and 13 COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms (COVID-19-SS) (Table S2).
A total of 5,521 proteins were quantified according to criteria and included in global proteomic profiling to reveal a list of 726 proteins found to be differentially expressed (|log2 [fold change]| ≥ 0.58, adjusted p ≤ 0.01, n ≥ 3) in the PBMCs of COVID-19-MS compared with those of healthy donors; 333 proteins showed a statistically significant increase, while 393 proteins showed a reduction in expression when comparing COVID-19-MS with control (Figures 3
A, S4A, and S4B; Table S3).
Analysis of the global proteomic changes reveals significantly reduced levels of PF4, GP1BA, SERPINA5, HBB, HBD, C1QBP, HRG, and RAC1 in the COVID-19-MS PBMC cohort (Figure 3B).
RAC1 also directly interacts with SigmaR1, a potential therapeutic target for COVID-19.
Overall, our functional analysis reveals the complexity of host responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection in mildly symptomatic COVID-19 patients, highlighting the abnormal regulations in blood coagulation and hemostasis.
Next, we compared the proteome change between PBMCs isolated from COVID-19-SS and COVID-19-MS patients.
Among 6,235 quantified proteins (n ≥ 3), 366 proteins were found to be significantly differentially expressed (|log2 [fold change]| ≥ 0.58, adjusted p ≤ 0.01) between the PMBCs of COVID-19-SS and COVID-19-MS.
A total of 209 of these proteins were upregulated and 157 of these proteins were downregulated in COVID-19-SS as compared to COVID-19-MS (Figures 3D, 3E, S4D, and S4E; Table S3).
The expression levels of neutrophil surface receptors (CXCR1, Siglec5, and CD177) and neutrophil granule contents (DEFA1) were dramatically upregulated in COVID-19-SS (Figures 3D and 3E), which is consistent with the elevated neutrophil population in COVID-19 patients.
,
 Consistent with RNA sequencing results from COVID-19 patients,
,
Laboratory results reveal increased neutrophils counts to ∼90% of the white blood cell count as COVID-19 progresses to critical stages.
14, 15, 16 The elevation of IL-8 and IL-6 but not IL-17 in PMBCs collected from severe symptomatic COVID-19 patients indicates critical roles for IL-8 and IL-6 in the severe inflammatory response induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figures 3G, 3H, and S4H).
In addition, a cluster of genes related to blood coagulation was dramatically upregulated in COVID-19-SS as compared to COVID-19-MS (Figure S4G), supporting the hypothesis that the abnormal blood clotting contributes to de ath in some severe COVID-19 patients.
As compared to COVID-19-MS, the downregulated proteins of COVID-19-SS are highly enriched in T cell activation, T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, viral transcription, viral gene expression, translation initiation, and lymphocyte co-stimulation (Figures 3F and S4F).
The expression of TCR subunits (CD3e, CD3g, and CD247), T cell surface molecules (CD4, CD8a, CD8b, CD2, CD5, and CD7), major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules (HLA-DRA), TCR signaling kinases and adaptors (LCK, FYN, SKAP1, CARD11, CAMK4, and BTN3A1), and T cell differentiation and survival (BCL11B) were dramatically diminished in COVID-19-SS compared to COVID-19-MS (Figures 3D and 3E), suggesting a failure of T cell activation and function.
These results demonstrate that severe COVID-19 patients undergo a functional decline in adaptive immunity, which correlates with their lower T cell population.
14, 15, 16
From the quantitative proteome analysis of PBMCs, it is clear that SARS-CoV-2 triggers IL-8 expression and increases neutrophil count, which may mediate the manifestation of acute respiratory distress syndrome in COVID-19 patients.
Establishing viral-viral and virus-host PPI networks is of high priority to understand the host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and guide the design of potential drug candidates for COVID-19.
While nsp10-NKRF interaction was not captured by the Krogan group, we have confirmed that nsp10 is associated with endogenous NKRF in HEK293T cells, suggesting that our dataset could serve as a valuable additional resource for host targets that are potentially involved in SARS-CoV-2 immune evasion and pathogenesis.
Our quantitative proteomic analysis using PBMC samples derived from both mild and severe COVID-19 patients begins to address this gap in knowledge.
Since our viral-host interactome analysis indicates that SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins may modulate and evade host innate immune response by interacting with key kinases and adaptors of the immune signaling pathway, it is not surprising that COVID-19 patients fail to mount robust antiviral IFN responses.
From our quantitative proteomic analysis, neutrophilia, leukocytopenia, and hypercoagulation were observed in PBMCs of COVID-19-SS patients as compared to COVID-19-MS patients, supporting the hypothesis that imbalanced inflammatory cytokine production, such as IL-8 and IL-6 dysregulation, contributes to the overactivation of neutrophils and regulation of the bloodclotting cascade.
,
To our knowledge, this is the first study to characterize the PBMC proteome profile in both mild and severe cases of COVID-19 infection, and it contextualizes the overall clinical features of COVID-19 patients at the protein level.
Follow-up work is required to tease out the detailed mechanisms involved and translate the therapeutic relevance of these findings in targeting the cytokine storm in COVID-19.
The datasets generated during this study were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the iProX partner repository with the dataset identifier IPX0002285000.
The trypsin-digested peptides were desalted by monospin C18 and loaded on a home-made 40 cm-long pulled-tip analytical column (75 μm ID x 360 μm OD, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH), connected to a Thermo Easy-nLC1000 HPLC system.
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed against a UniProtKB Human database (database released on Sept. 30, 2018) containing SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins using Maxquant V1.6.10.43.
To accurately estimate peptide probabilities and false discovery rates (FDR), we used a decoy database containing the reversed sequences of all the proteins appended to the target database.
MiST algorithm was used to calculate the statistical significance of the dataset.
The information of 35 patients with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (13 COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms and 22 COVID-19 patients with mild symptoms) and 6 health donors as control are listed in Table S2, including age (47-73), sex, and symptoms.
Basically, protein samples were combined to generate 3 control sample pools from 6 healthy donors (one sample pool was excluded from the list for the sample quality issue), 13 mild-case sample pools from 22 COVID-19-MS patients, and 10 severe-case sample pools from 13 COVID-19-SS patients according to the protein concentrations of all the samples due to the limited protein amounts extracted from the variable PBMCs of each case (Table S2).
Briefly, the datasets were merged by matching the protein accession numbers of each dataset using in-house developed Python scripts (comparepg.py).
Protein features with less than 3 quantitative values in each condition (H&MS or MS&SS) were removed from the dataset to make sure each quantitative protein in the list have at least 3 values for H cases, MS cases, and SS cases during the proteomics analysis.
MiST algorithm was used to calculate the statistical significance of the dataset.
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed against a UniProtKB human (database released on Sept. 30, 2018) by Maxquant V1.6.10.43 using the default setting.
The ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a global public health concern due to relatively easy person-to-person transmission and the current lack of effective antiviral therapy.
Quantitative proteomics was used to investigate the peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) proteome signature in COVID-19.
We elucidated 286 host proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2 and >350 host proteins that are significantly perturbed in COVID-19-derived PBMCs.
This signature in severe COVID-19 PBMCs reveals a significant upregulation of cellular proteins related to neutrophil activation and blood coagulation, as well as a downregulation of proteins mediating T cell receptor signaling.
From the interactome, we further identified that non-structural protein 10 interacts with NF-κB-repressing factor (NKRF) to facilitate interleukin-8 (IL-8) induction, which potentially contributes to IL-8-mediated chemotaxis of neutrophils and the overexuberant host inflammatory response observed in COVID-19 patients.
Funding  National Key Research and Development Project of China, National Natural Science Foundation of China, National Science and Technology Major Project, Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning, Shanghai Science and Technology Commission, Shanghai Municipal Health Commission, Shanghai Municipal Key Clinical Specialty, Innovative Research Team of High-level Local Universities in Shanghai, Interdisciplinary Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, SII Challenge Fund for COVID-19 Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Large Research Infrastructure of Maintenance and Remolding Project, and Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Technology Talent Program.
The COVID-19 pandemic is caused by SARS-CoV-2, but little is known about the functions of its viral proteins.
Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed elevated levels of IL-6 and IL-8 in PBMCs collected from severe COVID-19 patients compared with mild ones, and the functional annotation of differentially expressed proteins implicate pathways involved in neutrophil activation, T cell receptor signaling, and the coagulation cascade.
Combining virus-host interactome with COVID-19 proteomic analysis, the authors found that nsp10 interacts with NKRF to mediate IL-8 expression, providing a potential molecular mechanism for SARS-CoV-2-induced cytokine storm and marking it as a possible emerging therapeutic target.
Li et al. establish the SARS-CoV-2 intraviral and virus-host protein-protein interaction networks and reveal the overall proteome signature in PBMCS from COVID-19 patients by quantitative proteomic analysis.