The fast-spreading of COVID-19 raised a notion that mutations may drive its evolution.
The genome of COVID-19 is evoluted from SARS- CoV and MERS CoV6.
Comparison of the genome sequences of the COVID-19, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV showed that 2019-CoV has better sequence identity with SARS-CoV than the MERS CoV6.
Kabir et al. [3] extensively reviewed factors that affect COVID-19 genetic diversity and its evolution.
The COVID-19 has a unique amino acid sequence from other coronaviruses entirely in the regions of 1ab polyprotein and surface glycoprotein or S-protein.
Studies indicate that the human receptor for COVID-19 could be angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) virus is spreading rapidly worldwide, and the global interested scientists are endeavoring to discover drugs for its efficacious treatment.
Chloroquine phosphate, an old drug for the treatment of malaria, is shown to have apparent efficacy and acceptable safety against COVID-19 associated pneumonia in multicenter clinical trials conducted in China [5].
Excessive inflammation, oxidation, and an exaggerated immune response very likely contribute to COVID-19 pathology.
The authors in this report concluded that a synthesized mRNA of COVID 19 vaccine-induced anti–SARS-CoV-2 immune responses in all participants, and no trial-limiting safety concerns were identified.
Recently, a complete genome sequence for a severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) strain isolated from an oropharyngeal swab specimen of a Nepalese patient with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was published in GenBank (accession number NC_045512), excluding the poly(A) tail of the genome [14].
Taking this advantage, we hypothesized that designing a synthetic miRNA complemented to COVID-19 at 3′ UTR and another essential region, including ORF9, which encodes a nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (N).
This protein is a basic RNA-binding protein encoded in the most 3′ protein of the COVID genome, plays both structural and non-structural roles in infection.
The 3′ UTR region and ORF9 of COVID-19 were identified using the sequence (Acc.#: NC_045512).
Therefore, Thei-score designer (www.med.nagoya-u.ac.jp/neurogenetics/i_Score/i_score.html) was used to deduce some candidates of miRNAs complemented of COVID-19.
As pandemic, COVID-19, and its consequences on the global economy, we hypothesized a new approach for the treatment of COVID-19 paints.
This approach includes designing a mix of miRNAs targeting several regions on COVID-19 open reading frame (ORF) and 3 UTR and suitable delivery system targeting respiratory system tissues.