Since then, the coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) has rapidly spread across all continents, becoming a public health emergency (pandemic) as announced by World Health Organization (WHO) in early 2020 [21].
The main COVID-19 symptoms are fever and cough, but other conditions such as anosmia, cardiovascular and GI disorders have been increasingly reported, thus suggesting the presence of multiple targets of infection outside the respiratory tract [9,11,23].
Moreover, COVID-19 has been reported to be particularly more severe in patients with comorbidities unrelated to the respiratory tract, such as hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease [24–27].
(2) The digestive system, heart, kidneys, respiratory system and peripheral neurons are tissues/cells where SARS-CoV-2 might infect, generating different symptoms observable in COVID-19 patients [31,32,90,142,196,250–252].
Taking into consideration the high similarity between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, in regard to sequence conservation and structure of glycoproteins (Walls et al. 2020; Hoffmann et al. 2020,) and that SARS-CoV leads to the down-regulation of ACE2 [33], a recent study has suggested that this particular interaction may also occur in COVID-19 [34], thus promoting membrane fusion and SARS-CoV-2 entry into host cells.
Furthermore, the identification of the transmembrane glycoprotein CD147 [41] as well as the presence of furin-like cleavage sites in the spike (S) protein (absent for other SARS-CoVs) [42] might be associated to viral–host mechanisms of invasion and pathogenicity of COVID-19.
As they lose ACE2-mediated protection, Ang-II signaling contributes to the pathological findings observed in COVID-19 patients, such as disseminated coagulopathy and acute tissue damage [91].
A number of cytokines, including IL-6, IL-1β, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and IFN-γ, have been frequently reported to be elevated in COVID-19 [9,51].
CRS is believed to be a major cause of tissue damage in the pathophysiology of COVID-19 [52].
IL-6, the most important CRS causative cytokine [55], was found to be increased in the serum of COVID-19 patients presenting acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [56].
Certain cytokines whose levels are elevated in COVID-19 patients (i.e. IL-6, IL-1β and IFN-γ), are important activators of the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer of activators of transcription (STAT) JAK/STAT pathway and also able to induce NF-kB signaling [57].
IL-6, an important player in COVID-19, binds IL-6R and gp130 receptors to activate JAK/STAT-3 pathway and then contribute to the CRS observed in COVID-19 patients [88].
Among them, the p38s have already been described to be involved in SARS-CoV infection and, therefore, suggested as putative targets for COVID-19 treatment [68,69].
Taken together, we strongly believe that understanding the multitude of signaling routes affected by viral infections, in a cell/tissue-specific manner, can be crucial for the comprehension of the pathobiology as well as the therapeutics for COVID-19.
Accordingly, symptoms related to all these systems have been reported in COVID-19 patients [9].
The main clinical complication due to COVID-19, which also leads to a high fatality rate and affects ∼42% of the patients, refers to the ARDS [11].
COVID-19 patients affected by ARDS develop a severe form of this condition (i.e. PaO2/FiO2 ratio < 100 mmHg) in 18.9% of the cases [90].
In COVID-19-associated ARDS, the cytokine storm consisting of high serum levels of IL-1β, TNF and IL-6 is possibly responsible by severe plasma leakage, vascular permeability and disseminated coagulation and thrombosis [9,57].
Even though TLRs are crucial for correct viral defense, the constitutive TLR signaling, particularly due to TLR4 [108], might contribute to an excessive inflammation in COVID-19-associated ARDS (Figure 4).
TLR4 polymorphism and dysregulation of associated pathway, could be potentially correlated with COVID-19-mediated suppression of IFN antiviral response in severe patients [110] and then contribute to excessive lung inflammation at later stages.
TLR4 polymorphism might explain the differential susceptibility to ARDS in COVID-19 patients [106].
Cytokines that are commonly elevated in COVID-19 (such as TNF and IL-1β) can activate NF-κB-mediated gene expression in immune, bronchial epithelial and other lung cells [114].
The use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or synthetic corticoids in COVID-19 treatment is still under debate, since NF-kB inhibition must be taken with caution, due to its vital role to elicit antiviral related gene expression [115].
Upon further data validation, IL-6 and STAT3 could serve as promising therapeutic options for preventing the progressive severity of COVID-19-associated ARDS.
Altogether, a controlled approach to modulate NLPR3 levels and activity could be used as a potential target against ARDS in COVID-19 patients.
Nevertheless, GI manifestations seem to be less prevalent in COVID-19 than SARS and MERS [140].
Moreover, it has been assumed that the consumption of animal food from a public market at Wuhan, was responsible by the appearance of the first case of COVID-19 in China [24].
This relationship, recognized as the gut–lung axis, may help explain the progression and outcome of the digestive and respiratory symptoms in some COVID-19 patients [153,154].
The reduced expression of ACE2 and B0AT1 in the intestine due to virus invasion, leading to low tryptophan availability, represents a possible mechanism of how SARS-CoV-2 could lead to digestive symptoms in COVID-19 patients [151].
Nevertheless, the mechanisms involved in most of these SARS-CoV2-mediated events are still speculative, so more detailed research is required to help better understanding the temporal and prognostic profiles of COVID-19.
Patients tested positive for COVID-19 present clinical respiratory symptoms related to viral infection, which include fever, cough and myalgia [9].
Symptoms affecting both peripheral (PNS) and CNS, nervous systems have been reported in ∼36% of COVID-19 patients, such as headache, acute cerebral diseases, impaired consciousness, seizure, smell/taste impairment, muscle injury and neuralgia [27,163,164].
Some authors have suggested that the lack of SARS-CoV-2 in the CSF of COVID-19 patients could be mainly related to (i) the low sensitivity of the techniques available, (ii) the reduced viral levels or (iii) clearance of SARS-CoV-2 in the CSF compartment [170].
Based on these current findings, further studies are still necessary to better elucidate this detection of SARS-CoV-2 in the CSF, especially in large cohorts of positive COVID-19 individuals.
The consequent damage on the olfactory endothelium is part of the clinical symptoms presented by COVID-19 patients, particularly related to the PNS, such as anosmia or hyposmia [27,166].
Interestingly, some positive COVID-19 patients have been reported to present paranasal sinusitis with the presence of lymph endothelial cells infected by SARS-CoV-2 [181,182].
Among the theories suggested for viral neuroinvasion (neuronal retrograde/hematogenous/glymplatic routes), the one regarding synapse-connected route is also related to the trans-synaptic exchange of coronavirus particles from peripheral nerves (innervating infected target-tissues), by which the interneuronal transfer of SARS-CoV-2 may occur, that in turn could reach and cause dysfunction of relevant homeostatic brainstem centers, as observed in COVID-19 [183,184].
Considering the presence of neurological manifestations (as described in previous studies), the indicative of brain injury in postmortem analysis [185] and the controversial aspects of SARS-CoV-2 detection in CSF, a recent study has presented neurochemical evidence of brain injury in severe positive COVID-19 patients [186].
By using two classical blood-based biomarkers for CNS injury, the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAp) and neurofilament light chain (NfL), it has been shown that moderate/severe COVID-19 patients present significantly higher plasma levels of both biomarkers [186].
Despite the limitations (including further data validation), these data suggest the existence of astrocytic activation/damage at the beginning of the disease (initial response/higher levels of GFAp), as well as neuronal damage at later stages of a severe condition (illness progression/higher levels of NfL) in COVID-19 patients [186].
Nevertheless, despite the current advances in elucidating the mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 invasion, the clinical symptoms regarding nervous system and their similarity to the other members of the β-coronaviruses, little is known about the nervous system signaling pathways affected in COVID-19.
Since RAS has a relevant role in the regulation of brain homeostasis functions, such as modulation of water balance and blood pressure [187], the possible increase in Ang-II levels may be related to the development of severe cases presenting neurological manifestations (i.e. encephalitis and meningitis), as well as in cardiac and lung injuries in some severe COVID-19 patients [27,69,171].
In addition, since some COVID-19 patients also present apoptosis of endothelial cells, these biological effects might be related to the elevated activity of MAPK signaling [69,180].
With regard to acute cerebral diseases, such as ischemic stroke and cerebral hemorrhage, which are detected in positive COVID-19 patients [27], ACE2 may also play an important role, since has been associated with damage along the brain endothelium (vascular injury) [171].
Moreover, COVID-19 patients with neurological manifestations may develop immunosuppression and elevated levels of D-dimer (a marker for venous thromboembolism) which are associated with a poor prognosis [27,188].
Interesting, patients with severe COVID-19 may also present a prominent increase in cytokine release (hypercytokinemia) [9,189] that, in the context of the nervous system, can potentially compromise its homeostasis [61].
In addition to the neurological manifestations described for the CNS, the PNS also appears to be affected by COVID-19, since patients have presented smell and/or taste impairments, as well as complications due to the large amount of cytokines released systemically in the face of infection.
Koralnik and Tyler [190] described that COVID-19 positive patients developed Guillain–Barre syndrome (GBS) after the onset of viral infection, as an immune mediated complication of SARS-CoV-2.
In addition, electrophysiological studies performed in these GSB/COVID-19 patients have indicated a pattern compatible with demyelination process and axonal neuropathy, even without any positive detection of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR in the CSF [191].
Despite the low cohort patients analyzed in this study, the authors highlight the necessity of better epidemiological data and further associations between immune diseases and COVID-19, which can promote a better understanding regarding possible pathogenic mechanisms and therapies [190].
In fact, patients with CV conditions have presented a case fatality rate of 10.5%, which is higher than the the overall COVID-19 cases (i.e. fatality rate of 2.3%) [195].
According to a report from the National Health Commission of China, ∼12% of patients hospitalized due to COVID-19, without history of CV diseases, have presented elevated troponin levels and a high incidence of cardiac arrest during hospitalization, indicating that not only CV diseases could be a risk factor for COVID-19 but the presence of SARS-CoV-2 could also promote myocardial injury [196].
The impact of the CV diseases in severe COVID-19 patients has been clearly demonstrated by a recent study that compared non-surviving and surviving COVID-19 patients [180], in which 52% of the deceased patients presented heart failure, whereas only 12% of the survivors presented the same symptoms.
Another study has shown that out of 68 patients who died from COVID-19, 13 had previous CV diseases while none of the 82 patients who survived presented a history of CV condition [197].
Despite the evidence, it is still unclear why cardiovascular diseases are so prevalent among the fatalities from COVID-19.
According to the evaluation of 150 COVID-19 cases identified in Wuhan, the troponin levels in the serum of non-surviving patients were higher than in patients who recovered from the disease.
Furthermore, plaque rupture, ischemia or vasospasm have also been considered as potential causes of CV disease induced by a COVID-19 inflammatory response.
Despite the fact that further research in vivo still needs to be assessed, this mechanism could be useful as a target toward the treatment of COVID-19 and CV disease patients, since it would potentially alleviate an inflammatory response [199].
In fact, a number of arguments have been raised in regard to the use and cessation of these drugs during COVID-19 treatment in these patients.
Thus, given the lack of evidence of their benefit (or harm) for therapeutic use in COVID-19, physicians should properly access patients’ concerns and evaluate their medical history in other to keep or suspend the prescription for COVID-19 patients with CV conditions [198].
Although an early study has not identified any cases of acute kidney injury (AKI) in a cohort of 116 COVID-19 patients from Wuhan area [209], clinical reports have largely supported the association of SARS-CoV-2 infection with kidney conditions.
According to a large study including 701 COVID-19 patients, the most frequent finding related to kidney dysfunction was mild to moderate proteinuria (43.9%), possibly due to the disruption of glomerular filtration, while 26.7% of patients exhibited hematuria [210].
Another report focusing on 113 non-surviving COVID-19 patients pointed out that AKI was highly associated with increased mortality [212].
Another study that reviewed records from 13 academic and community hospitals in metropolitan New York, found that AKI was reported in 36.6% of the admitted COVID-19 patients, particularly in patients with respiratory failure who required mechanical ventilation (89% of the cases) [213].
Autopsy findings have demonstrated prominent acute proximal tubular injury, peritubular erythrocyte aggregation and glomerular fibrin thrombi in the kidneys of Chinese COVID-19 patients [214].
Several pathophysiological mechanisms have been proposed for the renal injuries observed in COVID-19, including organ-crosstalk and systemic-wide effects.
Similarly, a heart–kidney cross-talk may also be considered as a contributor of AKI in COVID-19 patients, since cardiomyopathy and acute viral myocarditis can equally contribute to renal hypoperfusion, thus leading to a reduction in the glomerular filtration rate [218].
It is worth considering that in a study with 1099 COVID-19 patients, septic shock was present in 6.4% of severe cases [223], raising the possibility that, for a subset of patients, intrarenal inflammation may be partially responsible for the association of AKI to more severe cases of COVID-19 [224].
These reports support a direct pathophysiological mechanism for the kidney damage due to COVID-19, following SARS-CoV-2 entry via ACE2 receptor [9].
No effective treatment for COVID-19 has been discovered so far.
(1) Commercially available angiotensin-II receptor antagonists, such as losartan and derivates, could act by mitigating the deleterious effects of AT1R activation in COVID-19 [229].
(2) Blockage of RAS can prevent tissue damage in COVID-19 patients [229].
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is one of the major cytokines involved in COVID-19 progression, which leads to CRS and tissue damage due to severe inflammation [51].
Currently, most of the proposed drugs for COVID-19 treatment are (i) ACE inhibitors, (ii) blockers of Angiotensin II production, and (iii) blockers/antagonists of AT1R (Angiotensin II target) such as Losartan and derivatives [229].
These molecules counteract the effects of the classical renin-angiotensin system, thus acting as putative therapeutic targets to regulate the increased activation of RAS in COVID-19 [229].
According to one double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, which encompassed a total of 1063 mild COVID-19 patients, Remdesivir provided very positive effects by shortening the time to recovery [238].
Favipiravir is another example of potential drug that can also inhibit viral replication in COVID-19 [239,240].
The humanized anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody Tocilizumab has been empirically used in patients with severe COVID-19.
However, Tocilizumab has also been shown to induce liver injury in, at least, one COVID-19 patient [243].
JAK inhibition has also been considered as a potential therapeutic approach for COVID-19, since a variety of molecules (known to be elevated in COVID-19 patients) signal JAK/STAT pathways.
Likewise, this drug is under clinical trial in COVID-19 since it may potentially reduce the cytokine storm in infected tissues, particularly the lungs [59,246,247].
The highly infective coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) is caused by a novel strain of coronaviruses – the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) – discovered in December 2019 in the city of Wuhan (Hubei Province, China).
Remarkably, COVID-19 has rapidly spread across all continents and turned into a public health emergency, which was ultimately declared as a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) in early 2020.
Although the mechanistic features underlying the COVID-19 progression have not been fully clarified, current evidence have suggested that SARS-CoV-2 may primarily behave as other β-coronavirus members.
To better understand the development and transmission of COVID-19, unveiling the signaling pathways that may be impacted by SARS-CoV-2 infection, at the molecular and cellular levels, is of crucial importance.
Furthermore, the potential involvement of these signaling pathways in evoking the onset and progression of COVID-19 symptoms in these organ systems are presently discussed.
A brief description of future perspectives related to potential COVID-19 treatments is also highlighted.