The rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) across the globe has led to an outbreak of life-threatening respiratory disease, termed COVID-19 (Zhou et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020).
While adults have suffered the highest rates of morbidity and mortality of COVID-19, children were thought to be spared (Dong et al., 2020; Ludvigsson, 2020).
The concentration of this disease to regions of high local SARS-CoV-2 transmission but, with an onset weeks after the peak COVID-19 caseload, suggests MIS-C is a secondary consequence of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
To estimate the average time between initial infection and MIS-C onset, we determined the temporal delay between peak COVID-19 and MIS-C admissions at our institution.
We performed high-dimensional cytokine profiling of 92 analytes using the Olink platform to define the secreted immune response in MIS-C patient plasma and compared it with plasma from age-matched healthy controls, a pediatric patient treated with IVIG with an unrelated infection (urinary tract infection [UTI]), and cases of active pediatric and young adult COVID-19 infection that did not develop MIS-C.
As otherwise healthy children rarely experience clinically apparent COVID-19 infections, we used samples from children with immunocompromising comorbidities (Pediatric COVID 1 and 3–6, details in Table S2) and one otherwise-healthy child (Pediatric COVID 2) who did experience acute COVID-19 infection.
While some of these MIS-C cytokine signatures resembled that of acute or convalescent SARS-CoV-2 infection, a unique MIS-C cytokine profile could be distinguished from that of COVID-19.
To more finely characterize the cytokine profile differences between MIS-C patients and pediatric COVID-19 patients, we conducted PCA analysis restricted to pediatric patients (Figure S3
A).
PC1 loading analysis identified components that separated the healthy pediatric controls from all disease patients, while PC2 resolved the profiles of pediatric COVID-19 and MIS-C (Figure 2H).
Elevations in unique chemokines (CXCL5, CXCL11, CXCL1, and CXCL6) and cytokines (including IL-17A, CD40, and IL-6) appear to distinguish MIS-C patients from pediatric COVID-19 patients (Figure S3B).
High-Throughput Cytokine Analysis of Pediatric Patient Samples, Related to Figure 2
Next, we performed CyTOF (Cytometry by Time-Of-Flight)-based immunophenotyping on nine MIS-C patients, five age-matched healthy controls, and seven young adults with acute COVID-19 infection.
These findings suggest that no active peripheral B or T expansion was underway at the time of sampling and distinguish MIS-C from acute COVID-19 for which an active bias toward effector populations was readily observed (Figures 3C and 3D).
Among innate cells, CD56lo NK cells were also decreased in MIS-C but not in acute COVID-19 peripheral blood (Figure 3E), while non-classical monocytes and pDCs (plasmacytoid DC) frequencies were lower in both groups (Figure 3F).
This antibody response demonstrated typical IgG class switching, absence of circulating IgM but elevated IgA, and effective virus neutralization, resembling, but not identical to, serologies from convalescent COVID-19 adults.
Clinical criteria detailed in Table S1 were used to recruit and classify samples as MIS-C or pediatric COVID.
Demographic and clinical data of recruited MIS-C patients and pediatric COVID patients are detailed in Tables 1 and S2.
Samples related to young adults were obtained from the Mount Sinai Health System’s COVID-19 Biobank.
Under the age of 35, found to be SARS-COV-2 positive by PCR test and classified with severe/moderate COVID-19.
Diluted plasma was then incubated in a 1:1 volumetric ratio with SARS-CoV-2 virus (USA-WA1/2020; GenBank: MT020880) at a concentration of 100 TCID50 (50% tissue culture infectious dose) in 1 × MEM for 1 h at room temperature.
Serology assays assessing plasma reactivity against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein were perfomed on samples from healthy patients (pediatric: N = 4, adults: N = 7), patients hospitalized for active COVID-19 (pediatric: N = 1, young adult: N = 4; adult: N = 3), convalescent COVID-19 patients (young adult: N = 2, adult: N = 6), active MIS-C patients (N = 9) and convalescent (recovered) MIS-C patients (N = 2; MIS-C 4 and MIS-C 7).
Samples for mass cytometry analyses were performed on samples from age-matched healthy controls (n = 5), acute COVID infection in young adults (n = 7) and MIS-C patients (n = 9).