SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease known as COVID-19, was first reported in late 2019 (Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of V., 2020, Lu et al., 2020, Paules et al., 2020).
COVID-19 is characterized by pneumonia, fever, cough, and occasional diarrhea (Guan et al., 2020, Holshue et al., 2020, Huang et al., 2020), and SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been reliably detected in nasopharyngeal swabs, sputum, and stool samples (Wang et al., 2020, Wölfel et al., 2020, Zou et al., 2020).
Early models of COVID-19 transmission dynamics estimate one infectious individual infects slightly over two individuals; travel restrictions reduce that spread to one individual, although these figures might evolve as more accurate epidemiological data become available (Kucharski et al., 2020).
Here, using published and unpublished datasets (all from non-SARS-CoV-2-infected samples), we analyze human, NHP, and mouse tissues that have been clinically identified to harbor virus in patients exhibiting COVID-19 symptoms.
Here, we focus our analysis and discussion on the specific subsets where ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are enriched and on relative comparisons within each dataset, rather than between datasets or equivalence to absolute numbers of total cells.
Human influenza infection also induces broader expression of ACE2 in upper airway epithelial cells and is corroborated by publicly available databases.
The dynamic, species-specific and multifaceted role of IFN raises implications for pre-clinical COVID-19 disease modeling.
To investigate which cells within human and NHP tissues represent likely SARS-CoV-2 targets, we analyzed new and existing scRNA-seq datasets to assess which cell types express ACE2, alone or with TMPRSS2.
In a previously unpublished dataset consisting of NHP (Macaca mulatta) lung tissue collected after necropsy of healthy adult animals and analyzed by using Seq-Well v1 (Gierahn et al., 2017), we recovered at least 17 distinct major cell types, including various lymphoid, myeloid, and stromal populations (Figures 1A–1C; Table S1; STAR Methods).
To assess whether the findings from NHP lung cells were similarly present in humans, we analyzed a previously unpublished scRNA-seq dataset derived from surgical resections of fibrotic lung tissue collected with Seq-Well S3 (Hughes et al., 2019).
Of note, we also observed TRIM28 co-expressed with ACE2 and TMPRSS2 among type II pneumocytes in this dataset (FDR-adjusted p = 2.34E−9), which might play a role in potentiating an IFN response in lung epithelial cells (Krischuns et al., 2018).
Next, using a previously unpublished scRNA-seq dataset consisting of granuloma and adjacent, uninvolved lung samples from Mtb-infected NHPs (Macaca fascicularis) collected with Seq-Well S3, we identified subsets of epithelial cells expressing ACE2 and TMPRSS2 (Figure S1; Table S3; STAR Methods).
Next, we examined several other tissues for ACE2-expressing cells on the basis of the location of hallmark symptoms of COVID-19, focusing on the gastrointestinal tract due to reports of clinical symptoms and viral shedding (Xiao et al., 2020).
Shown on the right is a tSNE plot of 13,689 epithelial cells selected from original dataset generated by 10x 3′ v2 (see Figure S2), colored by cellular subsets.
(E).
In an additional dataset consisting of endoscopic biopsies from the terminal ileum of a human pediatric cohort (n = 13 donors, ranging in age from 10 to 18 years old), collected with 10X 3′ v2, we confirmed a large abundance of ACE2+ cells with selective expression within absorptive enterocytes (29.7% ACE2+, FDR-adjusted p = 2.46E−100) (Figures 3D and 3E; Table S5; STAR Methods).
To identify potential viral target cells in nasal and sinus tissue, two regions that are frequently primary sites of exposure for coronaviruses, we analyzed existing scRNA-seq datasets from the human upper airway (inferior turbinate and ethmoid sinus mucosa) across a spectrum of healthy donors and individuals with allergic inflammation due to chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) collected with Seq-Well v1 (Figure 4A; STAR Methods) (Ordovas-Montanes et al., 2018).
We next utilized IFN-inducible gene sets of relevance to human airway epithelial cells, which we derived from a prior study by performing differential expression on a published dataset where air-liquid interface cultures from primary human nasal epithelial cells were treated with IFN-αA/D, IFN-β1a, IFN-γ, IL-4, or IL-13 (Giovannini-Chami et al., 2012, Ordovas-Montanes et al., 2018).
Next, using a publicly available resource (interferome.org) that hosts genomic and transcriptomic data from cells or tissues treated with IFN, we queried ACE2 expression within human and mouse cells, searching for datasets with a log2-fold-change of >1 or < −1 compared with untreated samples, including all IFN types (Rusinova et al., 2013).
We recovered 21 datasets spanning 8 distinct primary tissues or cell lines with non-trivial changes in ACE2 expression after both type I and type II IFN treatment (Figure S4A).
Immune cell types, such as CD4 T cells and macrophages, were noticeably absent from datasets with a significant change in ACE2 expression after IFN stimulation or were even found to downregulate ACE2 (e.g., primary CD4 T cells + type I IFN) (Figure S4A, and in our analysis of scRNA-seq peripheral blood mononuclear cell data from Butler et al., (2018); data not shown).
Generated from TRANSFAC data using the interferome.org database (Matys et al., 2003, Rusinova et al., 2013).
Furthermore, using both Transcription Factor database (TRANSFAC) data hosted by the interferome database, as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) data (provided by the ENCODE Factorbook repository), we found evidence for STAT1, STAT3, IRF8, and IRF1 binding sites within −1500–500 bp of the transcription start site of ACE2 (all in human studies, Figure S4B) (Gerstein et al., 2012, Matys et al., 2003, Wang et al., 2012, Wang et al., 2013).
We collected from both tissue sites because of early reports of anosmia in COVID-19 (Lechien et al., 2020).
We re-analyzed a publicly available dataset of RNA-seq from human lung explants isolated after surgical resections that were infected with influenza A virus ex vivo for 24 h.
To review the data presented: (1) we found that expression of the cellular entry receptor for SARS-CoV-2, ACE2, is primarily restricted to type II pneumocytes in the lung, absorptive enterocytes within the gut, and goblet secretory cells of the nasal mucosa; (2) ACE2 and TMPRSS2 co-expression in respiratory tissues is consistently found only among a rare subset of epithelial cells; (3) we observed similarities in the cellular identities and frequencies of putative SARS-CoV-2 target cells across human and NHP cohorts; (4) we observe increased expression of ACE2 during SHIV and TB infection of NHPs, and HIV/TB co-infection and influenza infection of humans compared with that in matched controls but caution that none of the datasets presented here were designed to answer this specific query.
We also present datasets separately, given that each study differed in its methods of tissue processing and collection, which can influence the frequency of recovered cell subsets (STAR Methods).
We provide Table S9 as a summary of ACE2+ and ACE2+TMPRSS2+ cells across various datasets.
This is based on several lines of evidence: (1) we identified a human goblet secretory cell subset in upper airway nasal epithelium enriched for ACE2 expression to have the highest IFN-α-induced gene signature; (2) we found that IFN-α, and to a lesser extent IFN-β or IFN-γ, induced ACE2 expression in a published dataset of air-liquid interface cultures derived from human nasal epithelial cells (Giovannini-Chami et al., 2012, Ordovas-Montanes et al., 2018); (3) we extended our search through the Interferome database (Rusinova et al., 2013) and found that, in epithelial barrier tissues, type I IFNs upregulate ACE2 in multiple studies, especially in primary bronchial cells and keratinocytes (Rusinova et al., 2013); (4) we found two STAT1 binding sites in the promoter of ACE2; (5) in our unpublished atlas of SHIV-infected macaques, known to have elevated amounts of chronic IFN signaling, we found ACE2 upregulation in absorptive enterocytes; (6) we directly provided evidence for IFN-α, and to some extent IFN-γ, inducing ACE2 expression in primary human upper airway basal cells; and (7) influenza infection in humans, a known inducer of the IFN pathway, leads to increased ACE2 expression in goblet secretory cells of the nasal epithelium (Cao et al., 2020).
Altogether, our own and publicly available data highlight that ACE2 might have been missed as a canonical ISG because of its notable absence in peripheral blood mononuclear cell datasets and in lung-derived transformed cell lines such as the A549 cell line (Butler et al., 2018, Letko et al., 2020, Rusinova et al., 2013).
Importantly, other groups have independently analyzed publicly available datasets, some referenced in our work, and observed ACE2’s behavior as an ISG (Wang and Cheng, 2020).
Whether IFNs upregulate ACE2 in putative target cell subsets in vivo will be of significant interest to define in future work once current COVID-19-related restrictions on basic scientific inquiry are lifted (Qian et al., 2013).
For example, examining the efficacy of recombinant human ACE2 to act as a decoy receptor or the effect of “ACE inhibitors” in patients with, or at risk for, COVID-19 will require careful experimentation in appropriate models together with well-controlled clinical trials (Hofmann et al., 2004, Monteil et al., 2020, Vaduganathan et al., 2020).
Furthermore, another study appeared on medRxiv profiling bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from 3 severe and 3 mild COVID-19 patients, though they were unable to profile sufficient numbers of epithelial cells (Liao et al., 2020).
Our study highlights the power of scRNA-seq datasets, both existing and novel, to derive hypotheses relevant to human disease that might differ from paradigms established by using cell lines.
In Table S9, we provide a guide to all datasets analyzed in this paper as well as links to each individual dataset for download with the main landing page here: https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell?scpbr=the-alexandria-project.
Downloadable datasets include both raw and normalized cell x gene matrices, as well as relevant metadata.
These datasets are additionally available here to facilitate downloading: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1bxCIqNeZ7wLuVOT16gphwj98_cc9KhrV?usp=sharing.
We have also posted these cell x gene matrices to Chan Zuckerberg Initiative cellxgene (https://chanzuckerberg.github.io/cellxgene/posts/cellxgene_cziscience_com) and the Broad Institute Single Cell COVID-19 portal (https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/covid19) as leading community efforts.
FASTQ files and cell x gene matrices for NHP and murine datasets, and cell x gene matrices for human datasets, are available at GEO: GSE148829.
Full information related to subject age/developmental stage and sex found in metadata associated with provided raw datasets.
Full information related to subject age/developmental stage and sex found in metadata associated with provided raw datasets.
Expression data for epithelial cells and enterocytes included in this dataset can be visualized and downloaded here: https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/study/SCP807?scpbr=the-alexandria-project#study-summary.
Sub-clusters (i.e., clusters within broad cell type classifications) were annotated by cross-referencing cluster-defining genes with curated gene lists and online databases SaVanT (http://newpathways.mcdb.ucla.edu/savant-dev/) and GSEA/MsigDB (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp).
Expression data for epithelial cells included in this dataset can be visualized and downloaded here: https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/study/SCP814?scpbr=the-alexandria-project#study-summary.
Expression data for epithelial cells included in this dataset can be visualized and downloaded here:
Libraries corresponding to 4 mice, with 2 Seq-Well arrays per mouse were sequenced using Illumina NextSeq as described (Gierahn et al., 2017, Hughes et al., 2019).
This dataset can be visualized and downloaded here:
Libraries corresponding to 14 mice were aligned to a custom reference genome encompassing both murine (mm10) and herpes virus genes: 84 known genes from MHV68 were retrieved from NCBI (NCBI: txid33708) and added to the mm10 mouse genome.
Type I Pneumocytes were excluded from this analysis based on uniformly negative expression of Ace2, resulting in a final dataset subset of 5,558 cells.
There is pressing urgency to understand the pathogenesis of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus clade 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which causes the disease COVID-19.
Here, we leverage human, non-human primate, and mouse single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets across health and disease to uncover putative targets of SARS-CoV-2 among tissue-resident cell subsets.
Graphical Abstract      Highlights     •  Meta-analysis of human, non-human primate, and mouse single-cell RNA-seq datasets for putative SARS-CoV-2 targets    •
Type II pneumocytes, nasal secretory cells, and absorptive enterocytes are ACE2 + TMPRSS2 +    •  Interferon and influenza increase ACE2 in human nasal epithelia and lung tissue    •  Mouse Ace2 is not upregulated by interferon, raising implications for disease modeling      Analysis of single-cell RNA-seq datasets from human, non-human primate, and mouse barrier tissues identifies putative cellular targets of SARS-CoV-2 on the basis of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression.