COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
Respiratory failure is the most common mortality outcome in COVID-19 patients, yet serious and even fatal manifestations are seen across multiple organ systems, including the brain (Helms et al., 2020; Pleasure et al., 2020) and gastrointestinal tract (Goyal et al., 2020).
In one retrospective study of more than 400 COVID-19 patients, nearly 20% had suffered in-hospital cardiac injury, which was a significant independent risk factor for mortality (Shi et al., 2020).
Nearly 25% of patients have gastrointestinal manifestations including anorexia, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and these symptoms are associated with worse COVID-19 outcomes (Pan et al., 2020).
A recent clinical study among 7,300 COVID-19 patients also showed a strong correlation between poor COVID-19 outcomes and type 2 diabetes (Zhu et al., 2020).
Recent clinical studies suggest that diabetes is not only a risk factor for severe COVID-19 disease, but also that SARS-CoV-2 infection can induce new-onset diabetes (Bornstein et al., 2020).
Currently, there are no vaccines or effective treatment options for COVID-19 due to limited knowledge of SARS-CoV-2 viral biology.
A human cell-based platform to study viral tropism would be a first step toward defining cell types permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection and for modeling COVID-19 disease across multiple organ systems.
To determine the relative permissiveness of hPSC-derived cells and organoids to SARS-CoV-2 viral entry, we used a vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)-based SARS-CoV-2 pseudo-entry virus, for which the backbone was provided by a VSV pseudo-typed ΔG-luciferase virus with the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein incorporated in the surface of the viral particle instead (Nie et al., 2020; Whitt, 2010).
Humanized mice carrying human pancreatic endocrine cells in vivo provide a unique platform for modeling COVID-19.
In brief, hPSC-derived pancreatic endocrine cells were transplanted under the kidney capsule of SCID-beige mice (Figure 2G).
As it is technically challenging to obtain pancreatic samples from COVID-19 patients, we compared transcript profiles from lung autopsy samples from healthy donors or COVID-19 patients and identified a robust upregulation of chemokines, including CCL2, CXCL5, and CXCL6, in the COVID-19 patient samples as has been described previously (Figure 3G; Blanco-Melo et al., 2020).
Together, the data suggest that SARS-CoV-2-infected pancreatic endocrine cells show robust chemokine induction, which is similar to what is found in autopsy samples from COVID-19 patients.
Consistent with results using hepatocyte organoids, KEGG GSEA comparing mock infected with SARS-CoV-2-infected cholangiocyte organoids revealed the upregulation of inflammatory pathways, including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and IL-17 signaling (Figure 4N, Table S1), which is consistent with previous findings in COVID-19 lung autopsy samples (Han et al., 2020).
Although respiratory failure is the most common adverse outcome for COVID-19 patients, they often present with additional clinical complications involving the metabolic, cardiac, neurological, and gastrointestinal systems.
Although human coronaviruses previously had not been considered to infect liver cells, our results are consistent with current COVID-19 clinical observations that more than 50% of patients have evidence of viral hepatitis (Ong et al., 2020).
A recent clinical study showed a strong correlation between COVID-19 and type 2 diabetes (Zhu et al., 2020).
Closer monitoring of individuals with high risk for diabetes is needed to evaluate the contribution of SARS-CoV-2 in previously infected COVID-19 patients to progression toward type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
SARS-CoV-2, isolate USA-WA1/2020 (NR-52281) was deposited by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention and obtained through BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH.
SARS-CoV-2 has caused the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 pathophysiology includes respiratory failure but involves other organ systems including gut, liver, heart, and pancreas.
Recent clinical studies show a strong association with COVID-19 and diabetes.
SARS-CoV-2 infection caused striking expression of chemokines, as also seen in primary human COVID-19 pulmonary autopsy samples.
hPSC-derived cells/organoids provide valuable models for understanding the cellular responses of human tissues to SARS-CoV-2 infection and for disease modeling of COVID-19.
Graphical Abstract      Yang et al. show that hPSC-derived cells and organoids provide valuable models to study SARS-CoV-2 tropism and to model COVID-19.