However, a pathophysiological function has also be assigned to ACE2, which is as the entry receptor for SARS-Cov-1 and the novel SARS-Cov-2 viruses, which have been responsible for the sever acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic in 2003 and the current coronavirus infectious disease (COVID-19) pandemic, respectively [1].
The SARS-Cov-2 infection resulting in COVID-19 symptomatology is characterized by a range of symptoms, including dry cough, fever, myalgia or fatigue, dyspnoea, and pneumonia [1,9].
In addition to systemic and respiratory symptoms, 14–36% of severe patients with COVID-19 show neurological signs, including dizziness, headache, taste and smell impairment, impaired consciousness, encephalitis, seizures, ataxia, and stroke [11,12].
This finding, together with the evidence of SARS-Cov-2 in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with COVID-19, suggested that the neurotropic effects of SARS-Cov-2 may contribute to the morbidity and mortality caused by COVID-19 [3].
Given the multiple roles of ACE2 and its expression pattern in different tissues, the alteration of its expression levels may have an impact on the susceptibility, symptomatology, and outcome of COVID-19.
The study was performed by utilizing 268 DNA samples representative of the Italian general population, which were partially available at the Genomic Medicine Laboratory of Santa Lucia Foundation Hospital and partially derived from international databases.
The genetic data referred to these samples were partially derived by whole exome sequencing (WES), available at the Genomic Medicine Laboratory of IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation Hospital and partially extracted by the Ensembl database [13,14,15].
We therefore selected the SNVs of interest by extracting the variants localized in the exonic and splice site regions of ACE2, whose frequency data were available from the 1000 Genomes and GnomAD databases [15,16,17,18].
The Ensembl database [15] was also utilized to download the allele frequency data of the 34 SNVs of interest in the worldwide populations, in order to compare the frequencies between the Italian cohort and the frequencies observed in African, American, Asian, and European populations.
The presence of the 34 SNVs in the Italian samples was evaluated by analyzing the output file derived by the WES and Ensembl databases.
To this purpose, VarSite [23], Human Splicing Finder (HSF) [24], and Uniprot database [25] were interrogated.
Moreover, Uniprot annotation database was utilized to retrieve the topological and functional domains organization of proteins.
Concerning eQTL analysis, the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTex) database [26] was utilized to retrieve the eQTLs variants with a significant effect on ACE2 expression in different tissues, and Biomart tool [27] was used to extract the significant eQTLs distributed on the basis of the affected tissue.
GTex database is a public resource that enables us to study tissue-specific gene expression and regulation, as well as their relationship to genetic variation [26].
The final goal of the study has been the research of variants potentially affecting ACE2 expression and function, which may contribute to SARS-Cov-2 spreading among worldwide populations, and may have a clinical significance regarding the clinical variability and outcome displayed by patients with COVID-19.
Successively, all previously discussed variants were evaluated as potential eQTLs in the GTEx database, and only rs2285666 was classified as a significant eQTL in several brain tissues, namely the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, basal ganglia, cortex, cerebellum, hippocampus, and hypothalamus (Figure 3).
This finding suggests that the genetic variability of ACE2 may have a greater impact on COVID-19-related symptoms and SARS-Cov-2 tissue tropism, rather than on the susceptibility to SARS-Cov-2 infection.
Considering the broader effect of rs2285666 in multiple brain tissues, we decided to look at the distribution of the eQTL variants located in and targeting ACE2 in the different brain tissues, which may thereby affect ACE2 expression, and in turn, contribute to the neurological symptoms and complications observed in patients with COVID-19.
These findings suggest that the alteration of ACE2 expression may be involved in different neurological symptoms (seizures, stroke, encephalitis, dizziness, headache, confusion, alteration of body temperature, anosmia, and ataxia) observed in COVID-19 patients, in relation to the brain-affected area.
These findings raise the need for further investigation on the role of ACE2 genetic variability in the susceptibility and clinical outcome of patients with COVID-19, especially concerning neurological symptoms.
Structural and sequence variants in ACE2 gene may affect its expression in different tissues and determine a differential response to SARS-Cov-2 infection and the COVID-19-related phenotype.
The eQTLs analysis located in and targeting ACE2 revealed a high distribution of eQTL variants in different brain tissues, suggesting a possible link between ACE2 genetic variability and the neurological complications in patients with COVID-19.
Further research is needed to clarify the possible relationship between ACE2 expression and the susceptibility to neurological complications in patients with COVID-19.