The emergence and spread of 2019 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and the possible development of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) it brings, has led us to a public health crisis, threatening the world and its population, since and all groups and ages are susceptible (Singhal, 2020).
Infected patients may never develop any symptoms; and the ones affected by COVID-19 may present variable clinical conditions, from loss of smell and taste, to mild respiratory issues, and with the possibility of severe symptoms such as respiratory insufficiency, that can result in death (Singhal, 2020).
The SARS-CoV-2 virus particles are transmitted by symptomatic or asymptomatic carrier people, and in the case of people developing COVID-19, the propagation begins days before the onset of symptoms, in form of large droplets during coughing and sneezing (Rothe et al., 2020), and possibly even during normal conversations, what results in a disseminated mass contagion (Stadnytskyi et al., 2020).
In face of this scenario, of a highly infective disease with potential to cause death, it has been previously shown that people with a pre-existing chronic medical condition such as obesity are more susceptible to develop severe COVID-19 outcomes (Chen et al., 2020).
Obesity has an impact on pulmonary function as it leads to decreased functional capacity and respiratory system compliance; a fact that may explain the impact of COVID-19 on these patients.
Furthermore, increased inflammatory cytokines may contribute to the increased morbidity associated with obesity in COVID-19 infections (Dietz and Santos-Burgoa, 2020).
The more frequent development of severe form of COVID-19 in patients with chronic medical conditions is possibly related to the role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in the viral infection (Wang et al., 2020).
Adipocytes and adipocyte-like cells, such as pulmonary lipofibroblasts, may play an important role in the pathogenic response to COVID-19, especially in obese and diabetic individuals; in these individuals, the ACE2 is increased which turns adipose tissue into a potential target and viral reservoir (Kruglikov and Scherer, 2020).
Recently, a molecular study conducted with 700 lung transcriptome samples from patients with comorbidities, cardiovascular diseases, familial primary pulmonary hypertension, hypertension and pulmonary hypertension, associated with severe COVID-19 showed that ACE2 is more expressed in these patients than in control individuals (Pinto et al., 2020).
In addition, there are other reports that contain other several genes with potential importance for SARS-CoV-2 cell cycle and invasion/attachment, that have been shown to be up-regulated in patients with severe COVID-19 comorbidities, such as: ADAM metallopeptidase domain 10 (ADAM10), toll like receptor 3 (TLR3), histone acetyltransferase 1 (HAT1), histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), lysine demethylase 5B (KDM5B), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), member RAS oncogene family (RAB1A), transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2), and furin paired basic amino acid cleaving enzyme (FURIN) (Pinto et al., 2020).
The RNA-Seq analysis was selected in order to perform a “free” investigation of the genes expressed in the cells, because RNA-Seq does not require predesigned probes, the data sets are unbiased, allowing for hypothesis-free experimental design.
ACE2 is widely expressed in adipocytes and enriched in adipocytes of individuals with obesity and type II diabetes; there are ACE2 regulator genes in the human lung, and the protein is used by SARS-CoV-2 to infect alveolar epithelial cells, resulting in the development of COVID-19 (Kruglikov and Scherer, 2020).
In our transcriptome data from human subcutaneous adipocytes, there was no detection of ACE2 expression, what is probably due to the fact that the subcutaneous adipocytes used are from normal individuals, and the expression of ACE2 is low to the point that it might be undetected by the parameters determined in our study for the RNA-seq technique; however the cell line showed the expression of multiple genes related to severe COVID- 19, such as FURIN, ADAM10, TLR3, KDM5B, SIRT1 and TRIB3.
FURIN cleaves SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) glycoprotein, the key protein used to infect mammal cells (Walls et al., 2020); ADAM10 is correlated with ACE2 cleavage regulation in human airway epithelia (Jia et al., 2009); TLR3 plays an important role in the innate response to SARS-CoV or MERS-CoV infection and regulates ACE2 cleavage (Totura et al., 2015); KDM5B regulates positively ACE2 (Wu et al., 2018); in more than 57% addressed studies, researchers found that SIRT1 was upregulated in the lung of patients with severe COVID-19 comorbidities; all these genes favor the viral infection and can be potential targets for preventing SARS-CoV-2 spread (Pinto et al., 2020).
On the other hand, TRIB3 gene has been linked to fatty acid synthesis control and insulin resistance, in addition to regulating plasma levels of triglycerides and HDL cholesterol in humans (Angyal and Kiss-Toth, 2012) and was previously reported to decrease virus infection and replication; so TRIB3 can be considered a therapeutic target for COVID-19 (Moraes et al., 2020).
The clinical characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 infection are varied and are similar to those described above by ARDS e ALI (Chen et al., 2020; Rubenfeld et al., 2005; Wheeler and Bernard, 2007; Matthay et al., 2012; Imai et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2016), a fact that reinforces testing irisin in cases of COVID-19.
The data presented by Pinto et al. (2020) and Moraes et al., 2020 (Moraes et al., 2020) offer gene targets for preventing severe COVID-19.
In conclusion, irisin presented a very positive effect in the regulation of diverse genes related to the COVID-19 outcome in the adipose tissue, causing reduction of genes implicated in elevated viral infection, and increase in genes that block virus-cell cleavage; these results indicate that irisin treatment could end in a reduction of SARS-CoV-2 infection rate in human cells.
The obesity is associated with an increased recruitment of macrophages in the adipose tissue (Weisberg et al., 2003), and irisin modulates macrophage activity by reducing reactive oxygen species (ROS) overproduction and increasing the expression of anti-oxidative stress factors (Mazur-Bialy, 2017; Mazur-Bialy et al., 2018); thus, the beneficial effects of irisin not only depend on the positive effect on the regulation of diverse genes related to the COVID-19 outcome in the adipose tissue, but also to its anti-inflammatory properties related to the targeting of macrophages.
Since the respiratory system is the most considerably affected in COVID-19, the effect of irisin in the lung tissue and the resulting gene expression must be tested.
This might evoke a COVID-19 therapeutic strategy to stimulate TRIB3 expression and decrease ACE2 regulatory genes, possibly aiding patients with both mild outcomes as well as the ones suffering from severe COVID-19.
Obesity patients are more susceptible to develop COVID-19 severe outcome due to the role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 ( ACE2 ) in the viral infection.
Our results, in human subcutaneous adipocytes cell culture, indicate a positive effect of irisin on the expression of multiple genes related to viral infection by SARS-CoV-2; furthermore, translatable for other tissues and organs targeted by the novel coronavirus and present, thus, promising approaches for the treatment of COVID-19 infection as therapeutic strategy to decrease ACE2 regulatory genes.