A novel coronavirus (CoV), designated severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2, underlies a pandemic infection, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which rapidly spread globally and has been proclaimed a severe public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) by the World Health Organization (WHO) (Wang et al., 2020a).
By June 30, 2020, more than 200 countries and territories reported COVID-19 infections, together comprising 10,185,374 confirmed cases and 503,862 deaths (data from WHO, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control [ECDC] are at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports).
After COVID-19 diagnosis, other symptoms can be detected by routine blood examination.
The neutrophils in 38% of COVID-19 patients were above the normal range, while the hemoglobin in 51% COVID-19 patients lies below the normal range, according to research at the Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan, China.
In addition, lymphocyte levels decreased in 35% of patients (Chen et al., 2020), suggesting possible dysfunctional cell-mediated immunity in COVID-19 patients.
It has been reported that interleukin-6 (IL-6) concentrations and ferritin increase with illness deterioration in non-survivors compared with survivors within a subgroup of patients with COVID-19 (Zhou et al., 2020a).
To investigate the pathogenesis and mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 infections in COVID-19 patients, blood samples were collected from three healthy controls, two IAV-infected patients, and five COVID-19 patients, including four patients (COV-1 to COV-4) with uncomplicated disease courses and one patient (COV-5) that subsequently progressed to severe disease (Figure 1
A; Table S1).
However, COVID-19 has distinct clinical signatures compared to IAV infections, including high morbidity and mortality.
COVID-19 patients were enrolled within 5–10 days of symptom onset based on positive nucleic acid testing results, and the day when PBMCs were first collected was named day 1.
After filtering out cells with low quality, we obtained transcriptome datasets from 46,022 cells with an average of 2,000 cells for each participant at each time point (Figure 1B).
To uncover immune cell populations in COVID-19, we performed unsupervised clustering and obtained 15 cell populations (Figure 1C).
The proportion of plasma cells and cycling plasma cells were increased significantly in both COVID-19- and IAV-infected patients (Figures 2B and S2), and there was no difference between these two types of virus infection.
As expected, when examining the functions of upregulated genes in B cells of COVID-19 patients compared with healthy donors, protein complex assembly and protein-transport-related pathways were especially enriched, which may be because a large number of proteins are synthesized during this process (Figure 2C).
T cells of COVID-19 (Figure 2E).
Taken together, these results demonstrated that elevated plasma cells and increased activation of T cells and NK cells in COVID-19 patients may contribute to defense against the virus.
Gene Ontology (GO) analyses were performed to gain insight into functions of different cell subsets between COVID-19 patients and healthy controls.
Consistently, “defense response to virus signaling” genes were also enriched in T, B, and NK cells of all five COVID-19 patients on D1 and D4, but not D16 (Figures 3A and S3A), implying an ongoing immune response against SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in these transcriptomic profiles were then compared between COVID-19 patients and healthy controls.
The expression of these four genes was also much higher in COVID-19 patients compared to healthy controls at the bulk level (Figure 3C).
To achieve this, we divided the disease processes of COVID-19 patients from symptom onset to discharge into four stages (Table S3).
Expression of IRF1, TP53, and CASP3 was increased in T, B, and NK cell subsets in COVID-19 patients compared to controls, while BCL2L11 exhibited different patterns in different cell subsets.
In addition to the XAF1 related apoptosis pathway, expression of genes in other apoptosis-linked pathways, including TNF and Fas pathways (Elmore, 2007), was examined in both COVID-19 patients and healthy controls (Figures 3F and S3E).
The expression of TNFSF10 (TRAIL) and its receptor TNFRSF10A were increased in T cells from COVID-19 patients relative to healthy controls.
Other TNF path members, including TNFRSF1B, were also relatively upregulated in COVID-19 patients.
As for the FAS path, the expression of FAS, FASLG, and FADD were upregulated in T cells of COVID-19 patients, though not significantly (Figure 3F).
In B and NK cell subsets, TNFSF10 and FADD were notably increased in COVID-19 patients with other genes increased mildly, except that Fas in B cells and TRADD in NK cells were subtly decreased (Figure S3E).
Taken together, we find that upregulated genes relevant to the XAF1, TNF, and Fas pathways may lead to increased T cell apoptosis in COVID-19 patients.
Next, we sought to identify the immune molecular signatures associated with COVID-19 and IAV infection.
Thus, we compared the expression of cytokines, cytokine receptors, and transcription factors in T cell subsets, NK cells, and DCs among COVID-19 patients, IAV patients, and healthy controls (Figures 4
A and S4A).
As the gene clustering pattern suggested, upregulated genes in COVID-19 patients mostly encode proinflammatory cytokines, cytokine receptors, and IFN-responsive transcription factors, while in IAV patients, proinflammatory transcription factors and virus-interacting host factors seem to be highly expressed.
Expression of STAT3 was elevated in IAV patients compared to COVID-19 patients and healthy controls and seemed to correlate with time post admission.
For COVID-19 patients, STAT1, a major transcription factor activated in response to interferon, was upregulated in activated CD4+
We measured plasma concentrations of IL-6 during hospitalization of these COVID-19 patients and after leaving the hospital (Figure S4D).
There was a rising phase of IL-6 in most COVID-19 patients, indicating an active inflammatory response, which is also observed in IAV patients (Yu et al., 2011).
T cells, naive T cells, and DCs of COVID-19 patients compared to IAV patients and healthy controls (Figures 4C and S4A).
Meanwhile, expression of IL6ST was upregulated in various cell types from COVID-19 patients and IAV patients compared to healthy controls.
Based on clinical observations that plasma concentrations of inflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-α2, IL-7, IL-17, and IL-10 were higher in COVID-19 patients than in healthy adults (Huang et al., 2020), we compared expression levels of their corresponding receptors in activated CD4+
T cells, MAIT cells, and NK cells across COVID-19 patients, IAV patients, and healthy controls.
Upregulation of IFNAR1, the α chain of the interferon α/β receptor, was significant in these cell types in COVID-19 patients compared to healthy controls.
T cells of COVID-19 patients compared to other groups, indicating that CD4+
Here, we performed scRNA-seq on PBMCs from COVID-19 patients.
Among all the immune cell clusters, the percentage of plasma cells was increased significantly among all five COVID-19 patients compared with healthy controls.
IFNα2 and IFNγ have also been strongly associated with lung injury in COVID-19 (Liu et al., 2020).
Consistently, “IFN-I response” was enriched in different PBMC subsets of COVID-19 patients in our study.
Moreover, severe COVID-19 patients showed a stronger response to IFNs and virus infection compared to mild patients and healthy ones.
This indicates that the intensity of the interferon response may both indicate the severity of COVID-19 disease and distinguish COVID-19 patients from healthy individuals.
According to our results, upregulated XAF1 expression may be involved in increased T cell apoptosis in COVID-19 patients, cooperating with other genes, including IRF1, TP53, BCL2L11, and CASP3 (Jeong et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2012).
Consistently, TP53 expression was increased in COVID-19 patients in another COVID-19 study (Xiong et al., 2020).
In addition to XAF1-induced apoptosis, the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis, including TNF-α/TNFR1 and Fas/FasL path (Elmore, 2007), were also found to be involved in different cell subtypes in COVID-19 patients.
Moreover, plasma TNF-α was reported to be increased in severe cases of COVID-19 (Chen et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020), and TNF expression was upregulated in PBMCs of COVID-19 patients in our study, demonstrating a correlation between increased TNF-α secretion and TNF-α-induced apoptosis in COVID-19 patients (Rath and Aggarwal, 1999).
Taken together, we found that the upregulated genes relevant to XAF1, TNF, and Fas pathways may lead to increased T cell apoptosis in COVID-19 patients.
We analyzed the expression of cytokines, cytokines receptors, and transcription factors that are essential in the immune responses to viral infection and pinpointed gene expression patterns in COVID-19 patients that differ from IAV patients.
The fact that expression of most cytokines was not detected in PBMCs might indicate that serum cytokines largely arise from the infection site, i.e., the lower respiratory tract for COVID-19.
We found that plasma concentrations of IL-6 are above normal levels in the majority of COVID-19 patients, consistent with other studies (Chen et al., 2020).
Our data show that expression of IL6R and IL6ST was upregulated in patients with COVID-19, and we suggest that increased expression of IL6R and IL6ST might synergize with elevated IL-6 to induce a strong inflammatory response, indicating that patients might benefit from IL-6 or IL-6R antagonist treatment.
Five patients with COVID-19 were recruited in the Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital from January to February 2020.
Influenza virus infection, respiratory syncytial virus infection and adenovirus infection were excluded in all patients with COVID-19.
The genome of SARS-CoV-2 was downloaded from NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) with the accession number GenBank:NC_045512.2.
Then, the integrated dataset was scaled and PCA was calculated.
We used Mfuzz (Kumar and Futschik, 2007) to identify time dependent transcriptional program in COVID-19 patients.
The samples from COVID-19 patients were grouped according to the disease progression stage (Table S3).
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic poses a current world-wide public health threat.
Here, we report the single-cell transcriptional landscape of longitudinally collected peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in both COVID-19- and influenza A virus (IAV)-infected patients.
We observed increase of plasma cells in both COVID-19 and IAV patients and XIAP associated factor 1 (XAF1)-, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-, and FAS-induced T cell apoptosis in COVID-19 patients.
Further analyses revealed distinct signaling pathways activated in COVID-19 (STAT1 and IRF3) versus IAV (STAT3 and NFκB) patients and substantial differences in the expression of key factors.
These factors include relatively increase of interleukin ( IL ) 6R and IL6ST expression in COVID-19 patients but similarly increased IL-6 concentrations compared to IAV patients, supporting the clinical observations of increased proinflammatory cytokines in COVID-19 patients.
Thus, we provide the landscape of PBMCs and unveil distinct immune response pathways in COVID-19 and IAV patients.
We generated a single-cell atlas of PBMCs in both COVID-19 and influenza patients    •  Plasma cells increase significantly in both COVID-19 and influenza patients    •  COVID-19 is featured with XAF1-, TNF-, and FAS-induced T cell apoptosis    •  COVID-19 activates distinct pathway (STAT1/IRF3) versus influenza (STAT3/NFκB)      COVID-19 and influenza are both respiratory infections with cytokine release syndrome.