The COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented threat to healthcare delivery worldwide.
This has had a marked impact on services and patient care for patients without COVID-19.
National guidelines recommended that surgery for malignant tumours should continue during the COVID-19 pandemic providing adjuvant oncology treatment is available.
Data were compared with a baseline MDT workload from the 4 weeks of February (3–28 February 2020) to provide information on the impact of COVID-19.
Project leads were invited to comment with free text on how their unit responded to COVID-19.
Using this free text, we developed three groups that arranged units based on commonly expressed themes of how they managed to mitigate the challenges of COVID-19.
In total, 131 patients (10.7%) had a change in their initial management due to COVID-19.
Project leads commented that COVID-19 had less impact on their units or were able to cope with the numbers of referrals.
This national study has shown the impact COVID-19 has had on MDT decision making for malignant (gliomas and metastases) brain tumour patients.
Like other cancers, COVID-19 has impacted on referrals.8
Group analysis identified trends in units that successfully reduced the impact of COVID-19 on MDT management.
Our findings complement other studies that have shown that the use of the private sector during this COVID-19 pandemic results in less disruption to services.
11
Objectives  Pressures on healthcare systems due to COVID-19 has impacted patients without COVID-19 with surgery disproportionally affected.
Each unit decided if management decision for each patient had changed due to COVID-19.
Conclusion  COVID-19 has had an impact on patients requiring surgery for malignant brain tumours, with patients receiving different treatments—most commonly not receiving surgery or any treatment at all.
This study was registered with the Royal College of Surgeons of England’s COVID-19 Research Group ( https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/coronavirus/rcs-covid-research-group/ ).