The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has spread globally and caused massive loss of life and economic hardship.
Treatment strategies for critically ill COVID-19 patients are lacking, with only limited evidence available for a battery of antiviral, antibiotic, and anti-inflammatory agents, and aggressive supportive therapy.
There are early anti–COVID-19 efficacy data with remdesivir.
New therapies are needed to improve outcomes for critically ill COVID-19 patients.
Several small observational studies published during the COVID-19 pandemic suggest convalescent plasma is part of an effective treatment strategy for patients with severe disease.17, 18, 19, 20 The first report describing administration of convalescent plasma to five patients early in the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan was recently published.
Symptomatic patients with a high degree of clinical suspicion for COVID-19 disease were tested in the Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory at Houston Methodist Hospital using a validated assay applied for under Emergency Use Authorization from the US Food and Drug Administration.
Twenty-five patients with severe and/or life-threatening COVID-19 disease were enrolled in the study from March 28, 2020, to April 14, 2020.
A total of nine donors provided plasma that was used to transfuse COVID-19 patients; two donors gave plasma on multiple occasions.
The observed thrombotic complications are consistent with findings reported for COVID-19 patients.
The current study was performed to evaluate the safety and potential benefit of transfusing convalescent plasma to patients with severe COVID-19 disease.
To date, this is the largest cohort assessed for outcomes pertaining to convalescent plasma transfusion for COVID-19.
Several case studies investigating the use of convalescent plasma to treat severe COVID-19 have recently been published,17, 18, 19, 20, 21 and the overall findings presented herein are consistent with these reports.
The results from this study support the existing data from the COVID-19 literature that point to underlying medical conditions, such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension, playing a large role in patients' COVID-19 disease course and outcomes.36, 37, 38 Of transfused patients in this study, 68% (17/25) had a body mass index in the obese category and 84% were considered overweight.
Despite inconclusive data on ribavirin's efficacy in the treatment of SARS during the 2003 epidemic, proven safety and ready availability supported its use in the treatment of our COVID-19 patients.
Tocilizumab was recently shown to reduce mortality in a retrospective analysis of 20 severe COVID-19 patients.
The patient outcomes in the current study are similar to those recently published describing treating COVID-19 patients with remdesivir on a compassionate-use basis.
Initial donors, who donated repeatedly, were blood type O. Because ABO compatibility was a requirement for recipient selection early in the study, many of our early recipients were also type O. Zhao et al have reported that of the 2173 patients analyzed in their study of COVID-19 patients in China, most had type A blood.
Regardless, our data do not reflect a higher rate of blood type A in COVID-19 patients.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, has spread globally, and no proven treatments are available.
Patients ( n = 25) with severe and/or life-threatening COVID-19 disease were enrolled at the Houston Methodist hospitals from March 28, 2020, to April 14, 2020.
The data indicate that administration of convalescent plasma is a safe treatment option for those with severe COVID-19 disease.