The pandemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that is the cause of the respiratory disease coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has resulted in tens of thousands of deaths globally since it was first identified in Wuhan, China, at the end of 2019 (1, 2).
Clinical manifestations of COVID-19 range from mild symptoms to severe illness and even death.
Viral RNA is detectable not only from respiratory specimens but also in the urine, serum, and stool using reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), and viral RNA has been detected in COVID-19 patients for more than 30 days (8–13).
To clarify the correlation between the culturability of the virus from clinical specimens and the RNA copy number, in the present study, we investigated the culturability of a total of 60 specimens from 50 laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 patients that were collected from 25 January to the end of March 2020 in Taiwan.
As a reference laboratory of the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC; https://www.cdc.gov.tw/En/), we have been performing viral diagnosis for suspected COVID-19 patients.
Specimens of suspected COVID-19 cases collected by border control systems and different hospitals around Taipei county are routinely sent to our clinical virology laboratory.
SARS-CoV-2 cDNA was prepared using RNA extracted from the specimens of the first patient with confirmed COVID-19.
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR remains the gold standard test for confirming COVID-19, and two negative tests at least 24 h apart in a clinically recovered patient are one of the important criteria for hospital discharge as recommended by the World Health Organization (22).
A previous study indicated that 6 log10 genome copies/ml sample might be required for virus isolation based on analysis of a series of specimens from patients hospitalized for COVID-19, and no virus could be isolated from specimens collected after day 8 of illness irrespective of the high viral loads (9).
Real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) is currently the most sensitive method to detect severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
ABSTRACT  Real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) is currently the most sensitive method to detect severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).