The world is currently faced with a pandemic of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and has no preventative vaccine or proven pharmacologic treatment.
It is predicted that the development of a safe and effective vaccine to prevent COVID-19 will take 12 to 18 months, by which time many millions of people may have been infected.
Because coronaviruses causing COVID-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) are able to spontaneously transfer to humans from diverse animal hosts that act as viral reservoirs, there is a pressing need to develop methods to broadly combat other coronaviruses that may emerge in the future (Li et al., 2005, Mohd et al., 2016, Shi and Hu, 2008).
The novel coronavirus causing COVID-19 belongs to a family of positive-sense RNA viruses, which typically infect the upper and lower respiratory tracts and cause disease by direct cytotoxic effects and the induction of host cytokine-mediated inflammation (Liu et al., 2020).
We argue that this approach, in which the lentivirus-derived RNA serves as a PAC-MAN target prior to lentivirus integration into DNA, mimics the crRNA targeting conditions that would apply for natural COVID-19 infection.
In the past two decades, multiple variants of coronavirus, including those causing COVID-19, SARS, and MERS, emerged from animal reservoirs and infected humans, each time causing a significant number of fatalities (Li et al., 2005, Mohd et al., 2016, Shi and Hu, 2008).
We found that just two crRNAs could target ∼50% of coronavirus genomes, including those causing COVID-19, SARS, and MERS; six crRNAs were able to target ∼91% of coronavirus genomes; and 22 crRNAs covered all sequenced coronaviruses with no mismatches (Figure 5B; Table S4).
Beta coronaviruses, the genus of viruses causing COVID-19, SARS, and MERS, were mainly covered by three crRNAs (crRNA 1–3), while the other genera were covered by crRNA 1–3 in addition to three other crRNAs.
To verify whether crRNA-N18f can target all L and S strains, we retrieved a set of 1,087 recently sequenced SARS-CoV-2 sequences from Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID).
It is important to note that PAC-MAN is currently a proof-of-concept antiviral strategy for robustly and broadly targeting conserved viral sequences with Cas13, and multiple important steps are required before it can be tested in clinical trials to possibly treat COVID-19.
These steps, including clinical trials, will likely take years; while PAC-MAN will not be able to stem the current rising tide of COVID-19 cases and related deaths, there is potential for it to be used against future viral threats.
Forward and reverse oligos for each spacer (IDT) were annealed and inserted into backbone using T4 DNA Ligase (NEB).
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, has highlighted the need for antiviral approaches that can target emerging viruses with no effective vaccines or pharmaceuticals.