In addition to the need for virus detection, evaluation of individual serological response [1], and biological analytical tools to manage COVID-19 on a population level, there is an urgent need to obtain objective information to identify at-risk individuals and to understand the marked variability in the severity of the disease in general, as well as in given populations.
Thus, in this context, here we develop two complementary themes: (i) a more thorough examination of the membrane shedding of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), the SARS-CoV-2 cellular target, and its potential repercussion on virus propagation; and (ii) a description of the interindividual variability of the genes (SNPs) involved in ACE2 processing and their potential impact on the risk of contracting COVID-19.
Chen et al. recently examined a large Genotype–Tissue Expression (GTEx) database and investigated the expression of ACE2 in different human tissues [3].
Globally, at a population level, there was a negative correlation between ACE2 expression and COVID-19 severity.
Cao et al. [5] compiled a database analysis of all 1700 variants in the region of the ACE2 gene located on the X chromosome.
It is still debatable whether these differences should be taken into consideration in epidemiological studies on COVID-19 covering ethnic associations with disease occurrence [6].
This relationship concurs well with the study by Chen et al. pointing towards a negative correlation between ACE2 expression and COVID-19 severity [3].
A similar supervised genetic approach to COVID-19 risk assessment could complement the current unsupervised GWAS investigations, which require large population studies exploring the whole patient genome for DNA variations in an attempt to explain interindividual differences in COVID-19 severity [e.g., the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) genetic projecti and the COVID-19 Human Genetic Effort [2]).
Ideally, in a final step, a multifactorial predictive index could be established incorporating SNP analysis and other, more established, risk factors.
Based on a broad public database compilation, we support the hypothesis that germinal polymorphisms may regulate the expression of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) cellular target itself and proteases controlling the process of its shedding or, conversely, its internalization.
Consequently, a genetic influence on individual susceptibility to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection is strongly suspected.