Consequently, we suggest inhibition of E protein can be a good target to alleviate ARDS complication of COVID-19.
These GenBank annotations contain heterogeneous identifiers for genes so we included unique locus tags containing the strain accession number and gene index number for computational processing.
Other databases showing greater detail about many viruses, such as Virus Pathogen Resource (VIPR, https://www.viprbrc.org) and GSAID (https://www.gisaid.org) are very useful but these resources do not provide gene clustering or pan-genome analysis.
We used all genes from Betacoronavirus dataset in order to explore Gene Ontology predictions through our in-house DeepGOPlus (Kulmanov and Hoehndorf, 2020) tool that combines deep convolutional neural network (CNN) model with sequence similarity-based predictions to derive relevant functional classes from Gene Ontology alongside a confidence score.
To validate the conservation and specificity of the SARS E cluster, we compared the SARS-CoV-2 E sequence with all known sequences in NCBI's non-redundant (NR) protein database.
However, a blast-based search against the DNA of all sequences in NCBI's NT database showed that the ORF10 sequence matches with 100% coverage in DNA of other SARS-like genomes, but there is no open-reading frame predicted for those genomes in the matching region (Figure 1A).
Moreover, our analysis is in agreement with ORFs 3a, 6, 7a, 8, and being accessory non-essential proteins, that would be inefficient targets for COVID-2019 therapy.
A number of isolates from COVID-19 patients are now being made available from several countries, thanks to resources such as gisaid.org.
Given the conservation of the key features of E proteins from SARS anSARS-CoV-2, these compounds would be promising candidates for inhibiting ARDS in COVID-19.
Such more indirect targeting of the protein E function might also be considered for COVID-19 therapy.
Therapies to combat the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and the lethality caused by the resulting COVID-2019 are currently focusing primarily on S, the viral spike protein (Kruse, 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020).
Our pangenomic analysis suggests that the protein E of all SARS viruses preserves its critical motifs used for pathogenesis, and should be considered as an alternative target to be tested for therapies to mitigate COVID-2019.
All datasets presented in this study are included in the article/Supplementary Material and https://pangenomedb.cbrc.kaust.edu.sa.
Together with functional pangenomic analysis, mutation tracking, and previous evidence, on E protein as a determinant of pathogenicity in SARS, we suggest E protein as an alternative therapeutic target to be considered for further studies to reduce complications of SARS-CoV-2 infections in COVID-19.