At the date of 23 April, there were about 2,700,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 (probably an under-estimated count, due to the high proportion of asymptomatic patients that are not tested) and almost 190,000 deaths recorded worldwide.
These epidemiological figures are mainly due to the rapid spreading of COVID-19 in Lombardy and Northern Italian regions of the Po Valley (Padana Plain), an area characterized by constant high concentrations of particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), already recognized as one of the most polluted zones in Europe [2].
Lombardy accounts for 56% of the overall COVID-19 confirmed cases, 45% of hospital admissions and 55% of total deaths, followed by Emilia Romagna (15% of cases and 13% of deaths), Piedmont (12% of cases and 8% of deaths), and Veneto (11% of cases and 5% of deaths) [2].
The Italian Society of Environmental Medicine (SIMA) has been the first to hypothesize—by releasing a specific Position Paper on 16 March—a possible link between the high mortality rates observed in Northern Italy due to COVID-19 and the PM concentrations [3,4].
A significant correlation was found between the geographical distribution of the daily PM10 exceedances in 110 Italian Provinces (number of days exceeding the PM10 law limit of 50 µg/m3) and the spreading of the COVID-19 infection before the shutdown decided by the Government [2].
These first observations suggest that particulate matter could be regarded—if not as a “carrier” or a “boosting factor”—at least as an indicator of the severity of COVID-19 infection in terms of diffusion and health outcomes observed in Northern Italy.
Meanwhile, a survey carried out in the U.S. by the Harvard School of Public Health has suggested a strong association between increases in particulate matter concentration and mortality rates due to COVID-19, with The Lancet scientific community highlighting the need for adopting a planetary health perspective on COVID-19 outbreak [6,7].
At the present, no assumptions can be made concerning the correlation between the possible presence of the virus on PM and COVID-19 outbreak progression.
However, based on the available literature, there is already enough evidence to consider the airborne route, with a potential role of particulate matter, as a possible additional factor for interpreting the anomalous COVID-19 outbreaks observed in Northern Italy and in the U.S., as well as in other areas characterized by high PM concentrations [8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18].
On these bases, in the frame of the One Health approach that can be applied to the international emergency generated by the SARS-COV-2 as it involves the interactions between humans and environment, the Italian Society of Environmental Medicine and the UNESCO Chair on Health Education and Sustainable Development support the vision of Sir Andy Haines, who has called for the adoption of urgent actions to counteract climate changes and the alteration of ecosystems that might trigger new and unexpected threats to human health such as that of COVID-19, which we are so dramatically experiencing worldwide [19].
The presence of SARS-COV-2 RNA on PM10 of outdoor air samples in any city of the world could represent a potential early indicator of COVID-19 diffusion.
Actually, it could be proposed that air pollution could influence the COVID-19 outbreak progression in a direct way or also indirectly, by enhancing the host susceptibility to viral infection and independently increasing the baseline risk of cardiovascular events or complications, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD), and other conditions that are known to increase the severity of viral infections.
On the other hand, COVID-19 has clearly shown its potential to become a hospital infection, at least in Europe and U.S. (whose healthcare systems are usually centralized at hospital level), with 10% of infected people being healthcare workers, and a huge proportion of cases and deaths possibly related to infections acquired in hospital setting or nursing homes [23,24].
At the present, many research groups are working on COVID-19 clinical features and on the diffusion of SARS-COV-2 in outdoor or indoor air (especially in hospital settings) as well as in water/wastewater.
A number of nations were forced to declare a total shutdown due to COVID-19 infection, as extreme measure to cope with dramatic impact of the pandemic, with remarkable consequences both in terms of negative health outcomes and economic loses.
On 16 March, a Position Paper launched by the Italian Society of Environmental Medicine (SIMA) hypothesized for the first time a possible link between the dramatic impact of COVID-19 outbreak in Northern Italy and the high concentrations of particulate matter (PM 10 and PM 2.5 ) that characterize this area, along with its well-known specific climatic conditions.
Thereafter, a survey carried out in the U.S. by the Harvard School of Public Health suggested a strong association between increases in particulate matter concentration and mortality rates due to COVID-19.
Although no assumptions can be made concerning the link between this first experimental finding and COVID-19 outbreak progression or severity, the presence of SARS-COV-2 RNA on PM 10 of outdoor air samples in any city of the world could represent a potential early indicator of COVID-19 diffusion.