Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19), has infected millions of people worldwide since its identification in December 2019, resulting in more than 400 000 deaths to date.
Despite the substantial reach of the COVID-19 pandemic in areas with high HIV prevalence, there are very limited data regarding the clinical impact of SARS-CoV-2 infection on PLWH.
COVID-19 also leads to marked immune dysregulation, with severe cases manifesting a dramatic hyperinflammatory syndrome that causes respiratory failure and multiorgan dysfunction [4].
Lack of knowledge regarding the interaction of HIV- and COVID-19–related immune dysfunction have led to uncertainty regarding appropriate clinical and policy guidance for the management and counseling of PLWH during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
We identified 405 patients not living with HIV, matching 1 PLWH to up to 5 patients by age (±2.5 years), sex, race/ethnicity, and calendar week of infection (to account for temporally associated changes in COVID-19 management and differences in follow-up time).
Oxygen supplementation requirements on admission were collected, verified via chart review, and used to categorize COVID-19 severity using published criteria [6].
Each of these biomarkers was also ascertained, when available, after the diagnosis of COVID-19.
We also stratified baseline laboratory measures by COVID-19 severity for PLWH, testing for differences in measures by severity category using ordinal logistic regression.
To compare cumulative incidence of death by HIV status accounting for potential confounding factors, we fit a multivariable survival model using Fine-Grey competing risk methods, including demographics, COVID-19 severity, comorbid conditions, and laboratory values that differed by HIV status [8].
Of the 4402 patients hospitalized for COVID-19 during the study period, 88 (2%) were PLWH.
The median age of PLWH hospitalized with COVID-19 was 61 years (Table 1; interquartile range [IQR], 54–67), and most PLWH were black (40%) or Hispanic/Latino (30%).
PLWH and uninfected persons had similar COVID-19 severity on admission as measured by oxygen supplementation requirements (P = .15).
Higher CRP values were present in PLWH with more severe COVID-19 on admission (Supplementary Table 2; P = .005).
Concern that COVID-19 might be more severe in persons with immunodeficiency or immune dysregulation has been raised since the emergence of the earliest cases [10].
However, outcomes analyses for PLWH during the COVID-19 pandemic have been limited, consisting of small case reports or series [12].
A single center in Spain reported outcomes for 5 males living with HIV hospitalized with COVID-19.
Larger uncontrolled series from New Jersey (13 hospitalized patients), New York City (31 hospitalized patients), and Madrid, Spain (28 hospitalized patients) also subsequently demonstrated COVID-19 outcomes for PLWH similar to those described for the general population [14–16].
This is broadly consistent with our finding that respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and death were not more frequent in PLWH when compared with demographically similar persons with COVID-19.
The lack of outcome differences is even more striking when it is noted that COPD, cancer, and smoking, which were identified as risk factors linked to worse COVID-19 outcomes in several previous studies, were far more prevalent in PLWH in our cohort than in comparator patients [17, 18].
Several factors have supported theoretical risks of worse COVID-19 in PLWH, including incomplete immune reconstitution and evidence of persistent immune activation in many patients prior to the pandemic [19, 20].
Furthermore, increased IL-6 and D-dimer measures have been independently associated with chronic HIV infection [21, 22] and have also been closely linked with COVID-19 severity in data mostly from persons not living with HIV [23, 24].
Neither biomarker differed on presentation for patients by HIV status nor was either associated with COVID-19 severity at presentation for PLWH.
Among PLWH, CD4 decline was noted in the majority of patients with available data, consistent with existing immunologic data on COVID-19 natural history, but the decrease in CD4 percentage was not large [25].
We did not find evidence of associations between immunologic measures (either decreases from pre–COVID-19 values or low values at the time of presentation) and adverse COVID-19 outcomes for PLWH.
Antiretroviral medications have been evaluated for treatment of COVID-19 [26].
There are limited data regarding the clinical impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on people living with human immunodeficiency virus (PLWH).
In this study, we compared outcomes for PLWH with COVID-19 to a matched comparison group.
We identified 88 PLWH hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 in our hospital system in New York City between 12 March and 23 April 2020.
PLWH hospitalized with COVID-19 had high proportions of HIV virologic control on antiretroviral therapy.
There was no difference in COVID-19 severity on admission by HIV status ( P = .15).
We found no differences in adverse outcomes associated with HIV infection for hospitalized COVID-19 patients compared with a demographically similar patient group.
There are limited data on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) clinical outcomes for people living with human immunodeficiency virus (PLWH).
We report outcomes for a cohort of hospitalized PLWH with COVID-19 compared with demographically matched comparators.