Since its first occurrence in December 2019 in China, the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak, leading to COronaVIrus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), spread around the world.
Although other studies have already evaluated mismatches in primers and probes used for SARS-CoV-2 detection, they have often only incorporated a limited number of genome sequences or RT-qPCR assays, or only evaluated the situation at a single time point [28,35,36,37,38].
Seven RT-qPCR tests originated from the WHO technical guidance published for laboratory testing of SARS-CoV-2 in humans [27] and were developed by (in no specific order) the Chinese Center for Disease Control and prevention (CDC) (Assays_1 (ORF1b and N)), the German Charité Hospital (Assays_2 (RdRp-P1, RdRp-P2, E, and N)), the French Institut Pasteur (Assays_3 (RdRp-IP2, RdRp-IP4, and E)), the US CDC (Assays_4 (N-1, N-2, and N-3)), the Japanese National Institute for Infectious Diseases (NIID) (Assay_5_N), the Hong-Kongese Faculty of Medicine HKU Med (Assays_6 (RdRp/nsp14 and N)), and the Thai National Institute of Health (NIH) (Assay_7_N).
Other assays (5) were retrieved from the literature or from a working document of the European Commission inventorying the diagnostic tests developed for COVID-19 [34]—i.e., Assays_8 (RdRp/Hel, S, and N)), Assays_9_ORF1a, Assays_10 (RdRp, S, E, and N), Assays_11 (N-1, N-2, ORF1a-3, ORF1a-4, S-5, and S-6), and Assay_12_E.
A total of 3590 SARS-CoV-2 genomes, sequenced from samples collected before the 7th of April 2020, were downloaded from the GISAID EpiCoV database, the NCBI Virus database, and the CNGB hCoV-19 database.
For exclusivity testing, 2624 non-SARS-CoV-2 genomes belonging to other members of the Coronaviridae family and other common respiratory viruses were downloaded from the NCBI Virus database and ViralZone.
With the aim of evaluating the stability of the assay’s specificity over time, a second batch of SARS-CoV-2 genomes (1165), sequenced from samples collected between the 7th of April and the 7th of May 2020, was downloaded from the GISAID EpiCoV and NCBI Virus databases.
After clearing this dataset from low-quality sequences and the clustering of identical genomes, 968 representative unique SARS-CoV-2 genomes were obtained.
The other primers and probe sets evaluated with this more recent dataset all demonstrated a 100% inclusivity, except Assay_2_RdRp-P1, Assay_2_RdRp-P2, and Assay_8_N, which showed an inclusivity of between 99% and 100%.
Interestingly, when the inclusivity of Assays 1 (ORF1b and N), Assays_2 (RdRp-P1, RdRp-P2, E, and N), Assays_4 (N-1, N-2, and N-3), and Assays_8 (RdRp/Hel, S, and N) was evaluated again with a new dataset of SARS-CoV-2 genomes downloaded one month after the first one; some of these SNPs were not detected any more, while few new ones were observed.
To better appreciate any bias, it would be beneficial to add to the public databases enough relevant metadata with the exact information on how the SARS-CoV-2 positive samples were determined (including which RT-qPCR assay was used, if determined as such), and how the libraries for the WGS of the viral genome were made, as this information is not always available.
This positive signal is not surprising, as a close genomic similarity was observed between the first SARS-CoV and the bat-coronavirus suspected to be the origin of the COVID-19 zoonosis.
The diversity in the amplicon sequences was very limited and remained unchanged when using a new dataset of SARS-CoV-2 genomes collected one month after the first one, indicating that this locus is a good RT-qPCR target, although this should be re-evaluated on regular basis.
Moreover, to determine if new stable mutations will appear in SARS-CoV-2, potentially impacting the specificity of RT-qPCR tests, an evaluation similar to what was presented in this study should be conducted regularly and definitely as soon as a vaccine or treatment is in place, as new data are uploaded to the genomic databases daily.
Firstly, the genome sequence for the same sample can potentially be deposited in multiple databases that, however, all use different identifiers that cannot be reconciled.
SCREENED is available as an open-source tool that can be executed through a user-friendly interface using the Galaxy Workflow Management system [57] incorporated in the public Galaxy @Sciensano instance (https://galaxy.sciensano.be, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium), or alternatively that can be downloaded (https://github.com/BioinformaticsPlatformWIV-ISP/SCREENED, GitHub, San-Francisco, CA, USA) to be run locally on the Linux command line.
The current COronaVIrus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic started in December 2019.
COVID-19 cases are confirmed by the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in biological samples by RT-qPCR.