However, the role and timing of tracheostomy for patients requiring critical care for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is unclear.
Early guidelines from both the UK and national bodies proposed a cautious approach to tracheostomy in patients with COVID-19—avoiding before 10 days of intubation and giving serious consideration before performing at all between 10 and 21 days after intubation, allowing for a sufficient decline in viral load.
With a dedicated 24 h on call tracheostomy service competent in percutaneous and surgical techniques, and access to dedicated COVID emergency theatres, the choice of performing a surgical or percutaneous tracheostomy depended only on patient body habitus, adequate neck extension, and grade of direct laryngoscopy.
COVID-19-related laryngeal oedema, and upper airway oedema from prone-positioning also increased the risk of failure of extubation.
These factors all guided a more interventionalist approach adopted by our COVID-19 airway team.
In the absence of an evidence base, many guidelines based on expert opinion were published referencing the role of tracheostomy in COVID-19.
Later guidelines from an expert working group adopted a more moderate stance and the results of this study provide support for this approach.
,
 Tracheostomy timing in COVID-19 patients should take into consideration the safety and ideal timing for patient outcomes, and the safety of healthcare personnel performing the tracheostomy.
,
However, tracheostomy occurred in both trial arms much earlier after intubation than is recommended in the COVID-19 setting.
Among the tracheostomy team, none of the clinicians developed COVID-19 symptoms during the study period and subsequent antibody testing at 2 weeks after the study period was negative in all but one surgeon, who developed COVID-19 before commencing on the team.
In addition, none of the SLT or ODP team members involved developed COVID-19 symptoms.
Our experience in a much larger cohort supports the assertion that tracheostomy can be performed with low risk to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers.
Prolonged continuous sedation requirements are a recognised feature of ventilated COVID-19 patients.
The role of tracheostomy in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is unclear, with several consensus guidelines advising against this practice.
We developed both a dedicated airway team and coordinated education programme to facilitate ward management of tracheostomised COVID-19 patients.
Here, we report outcomes in the first 100 COVID-19 patients who underwent tracheostomy at our institution.
This was a prospective observational cohort study of patients confirmed to have COVID-19 who required mechanical ventilation at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
Secondary outcomes included duration of ventilation, ICU stay, and healthcare workers directly involved in tracheostomy care acquiring COVID-19.
Results  A total of 164 patients with COVID-19 were admitted to the ICU between March 9, 2020 and April 21, 2020.
No healthcare workers developed COVID-19.
Conclusion  Independent of the severity of critical illness from COVID-19, 30-day survival was higher and ICU stay shorter in patients receiving tracheostomy.
Early tracheostomy appears to be safe in COVID-19.