Thecoronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection can lead to a series of clinical settings from non-symptomatic viral carriers/spreaders to severe illness characterized by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
1, 2, 3 A sizable part of patients with COVID-19 have mild/moderate clinical symptoms at the early stage of infection, but the disease progression may become quite rapid in the later stage with ARDS as the common manifestation and followed by critical multiple organ failure, causing a high mortality rate of 7-10% in the elderly population with non-communicable chronic disease (NCD). [1,2,4]
The pathological evidences in the lung of fatal cases are fundamental for the mechanistic understanding and treatment of severe patients with COVID-19.
In this study, we investigated the critical pathological changes in the lung of severe COVID-19 patients.
We hope this work may contribute in a significant way to the understanding of the mechanisms underlying the phenotype of severe cases in COVID-19 and appropriate development of treatment strategies.
The two deceased COVID-19 patients, with the diagnosis confirmed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for SARS-CoV-2, were a 53 years old female (Patient No 1) and a 62 years old male (Patient No 2) (Table 1).
The pathological investigations of severe patients are pivotal for the understanding of pathogenesis of COVID-19 and assessment of clinical treatments.
Special attention was given to the abnormalities in lungs, which are the main damaged organ in severe COVID-19 patients.
It is one of common manifestations in the diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) that existed in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) not only in COVID19 but also in SARS and MERS.
9, 10, 11, 12, 13 Though the endothelial injury and thrombosis were not common in our cases, resent studied showed the high incidence of thromboembolic events in segmental/subsegmental pulmonary arterial vessels [14], pulmonary embolism and deep venous thrombosis [15], and microvascular thrombosis [16], suggested coagulopathy in severe COVID-19 infection patients.
However, the pathology of lungs in COVID-19 also exhibited unique features as compared to SARS.
In COVID-19, we found mucous plugs in all respiratory tracts, terminal bronchioles and pulmonary alveoli, which was not described in SARS.
Another unique feature of COVID-19 was the excessive mucus secretion with serous and fibrinous exudation, which could aggravate the dysfunction of ventilation.
Therefore, the pathogenic mechanisms responsible for the hypoxemia could be somehow different between COVID-19 and SARS patients.
We assumed these lesions could play a part in the sputum suction failure in very severe COVID-19 patients.
In addition, the differences between COVID-19 and SARS could be found at the level of immune cell involvement.
In the case of COVID-19, the viral infection of aggregated alveolar macrophages was obvious from early phase to the late stage, according to our study and the results in recent reports of pulmonary pathology [17,20].
The spectacular infiltration and activation of alveolar macrophages in COVID-19 might represent the shift of classically activated phenotype (M1) to alternatively activated phenotype (M2) of these cells, whereas this shift, particularly in the case of antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), could contribute to the inflammatory injuries and fibrosis of respiratory tracts. [21]
Recently, the Tocilizumab therapy was recommended in the Guideline of Diagnosis and Treatment of COVID-19 (version 7) by the National Health Commission in China to control the CRS.
While potential benefits of this treatment still require definite evidence, our pathological findings tend to support the clinical practice of the anti-IL-6/IL-6R antibody treatment among severe COVID-19 patients in order to inhibit the vicious cycle of alveolar macrophage activation and inflammatory injuries.
On the other hand, the use of anti-viral effect of convalescent plasma from recovered patients has been shown to be effective in the treatment of severe cases of COVID-19. [24]
The novel coronavirus pneumonia COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection could lead to a serious of clinical symptoms and severe illness, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and fatal organ failure.
We report the fundamental pathological investigation in the lungs and other organs of fatal cases for the mechanistic understanding of severe COVID-19 and the development of specific therapy in these cases.
The autopsy and pathological investigations of specimens were performed on bodies of two deceased cases with COVID-19.