It has the potential to yield complex and predictive biomarker signatures that support clinical decision making, as well as to enable the prediction of patient trajectories via machine learning methods with datasets of sufficient depth and size (Ahadi et al., 2020).
We first benchmarked the platform on a cohort-based epidemiological study, Generation Scotland (GS) (Smith et al., 2013), and at considerably higher throughput, demonstrated a level of precision and consistency that, to our knowledge, is yet unachieved in comparable large-scale proteomic studies.
We then employed this workflow in an immediate response to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic outbreak in Germany, by applying it to a cohort that includes the first COVID-19 patients hospitalized at the Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin.
We measured samples from a primary exploratory cohort comprising thirty-one COVID-19 patients to identify clinical classifiers, candidate biomarkers as well as potential targets that picture the host immune response specific to a SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 4A).
We identified protein expression signatures that can classify COVID-19 patients according to WHO grading, introduced as of April 2020 (World Health Organization, 2020).
First, a spectral library is automatically “refined” using the dataset in question: only detectable peptide precursors are retained, and their reference spectra and retention times are replaced with empirically observed.
We applied the developed workflow for the analysis of serum and citrate plasma samples for two independent COVID-19 cohorts that included patients who were among the first that were hospitalized at Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, between March 1st and March 26th 2020.
Severity of COVID-19 was graded using the WHO ordinal outcome scale of clinical improvement (score 3 = hospitalized, no oxygen therapy; score 4 = oxygen by mask or nasal prongs; score 5 = non-invasive ventilation or high-flow oxygen; score 6 = intubation and mechanical ventilation; score 7 = ventilation and additional organ support) (World Health Organization, 2020) (Table S2).
Four patients (13%) died from COVID-19, and 4 patients remain hospitalized at the time of writing.
Successively, a control group, consisting of 15 healthy volunteers and 17 further patients suffering from COVID-19, was recruited at the same hospital and used for validation of the biomarkers discovered (Table S1).
Protein responses based on COVID-19 severity were obtained from a cohort of 31 hospitalized SARS-CoV-2 infected patients.
Severity of COVID-19 was graded using the WHO ordinal outcome scale of clinical improvement (World Health Organization, 2020).
(C) Heatmap shows protein signatures that report on COVID-19 severity.
In the exploratory cohort, which included 104 serum samples obtained from the 31 of the earliest COVID-19 patients, we quantified 297 protein groups among which 229 unique proteins were detected with 75% data completeness.
To account for this biological limitation, we applied very strict filtering to the dataset, namely, we only tested for differential abundance of proteins which had at least five different peptide precursors identified at least in one of the acquisitions.
Next, to validate the biomarkers, we processed the validation cohort (Table S1) and recorded 96 proteomes in triplicates for 15 healthy volunteers and 17 COVID-19 patients (Table S1).
We illustrate the quantitative variability of the validated biomarkers for COVID-19 severity on a heatmap (Figure 4C) and as boxplots (Figures 4D) as well as summarize their potential connection to COVID-19 in Table S3.
To exclude the possibility that concentration changes in these markers are due to frequent confounders, like age, we have plotted the variability of the same proteins in the GS cohort, with age spanning from 37 to 79, on samples that have been collected before the COVID-19 outbreak.
We note that for identified proteins the change between mild and severe COVID-19 substantially exceeds the variation seen in the general population (Figure 4D).
A PCA categorizes the individuals according to the severity of COVID-19 (Figure 4B).
Moreover, we illustrate the concentration changes of the biomarkers validated in the control cohort, upon grouping of the patients according the WHO severity criteria, ranging from scale 3 (hospitalized, no oxygen therapy) to the most critical (scale 7) in a heatmap (Table S1 for the grading of each patient), which graphically illustrates how level changes in these proteins reflect a progression from mild to severe COVID-19 (Figure 4C).
First, two patients (#13 and #32) in the group of critical patients, which later died from COVID-19, clearly clustered in the heatmap and indeed had one of the most pronounced proteomic signatures (Figure 4C), implying that proteomics bears the potential to support predictions of clinical trajectories.
When we first obtained the dataset, two individuals (patients 4 and 6) initially clinically assessed as severe (Kurth et al., 2020) clustered with patients that suffered from the mild form of COVID-19 (Figure S3).
These results triggered a retrospective assessment, which revealed that patient 4 turned out to be suffering from type B influenza rather than a SARS-CoV-2 infection, whereas patient 6 was classified as severe due to recent chemo-immunotherapy due to a hematological malignancy, applied just ten days before his COVID-19-related hospitalization.
We have, as a consequence, excluded patient 4 from the COVID-19 dataset (all results shown in Figure 4).
We also observe upregulation of fibrinogen, a coagulation factor, and SERPINA10, an inhibitor of the F10a coagulation factor, further highlighting the importance of coagulation in SARS-CoV-2 infection, established by previous observations of elevated coagulation in severe COVID-19 cases (Zhou et al., 2020a).
A parallel study by (Shen et al., 2020) used a more conventional and time consuming (120× pre-fractionation consolidated in 40 fractions with TMT-16 plex) proteomics method to characterize plasma samples from 99 study participants, including 46 samples from patients with COVID-19 diagnosed in China.
For instance, we cannot confirm the downregulation of pro-platelet basic protein (PPBP) and platelet factor 4 (PF4) in severe COVID-19 as highlighted by Shen et al.
Extensive worldwide efforts have been directed recently into finding drug targets for COVID-19 treatment.
For example, pro-inflammatory signaling via IL-6 has been determined to be a marker of severe COVID-19 (Chen et al., 2020; Ruan et al., 2020) and preliminary results on the inhibition of IL-6 receptor (IL-6R) with tocilizumab seem to indicate clinical improvement (Coomes and Haghbayan, 2020).
Here, we discovered several proteins that are differentially expressed with the severity of COVID-19 that are linked to IL-6-mediated proinflammatory cytokine signaling: (1) the CD14-LBP LPS recognition system, (2) upregulation of LRG1, an angiogenesis and anti-apoptotic factor associated with inflammation, and (3) upregulation of the LGALS3BP, an inducer of IL-6.
Here, we observed upregulation of both monocyte differentiation antigen CD14 (~2.7×) and LBP (~3.9×) in severe COVID-19.
Of note, the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored form of CD14 is primarily displayed by monocytes and macrophages (Marcos et al., 2010), while the proportion of CD14+CD16+ inflammatory monocytes in the peripheral blood increases along with COVID-19 severity (Zhou et al., 2020b).
Given that CD14 is a potent activator of pro-inflammatory cytokine signaling (Zanoni and Granucci, 2013), it might present a potential therapeutic target for COVID-19.
Given the previously reported association of the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) infection with lung fibrosis (Zhao et al., 2008) and emerging reports (British Thoracic Society, 2020) of lung fibrosis in a substantial proportion of COVID-19 survivors, we hypothesize that the ~2.1× elevation of serum LRG1 levels we observe in critical COVID-19 cases in comparison with the mild cases might indicate the increased risk of fibrosis, highlighting LRG1 as yet another potential therapeutic candidate for COVID-19 treatment.
Inhibition of galectin-3-mediated signaling pathways hence represents another potential therapeutic target against COVID-19.
Going forward, it will be important to assess GSN levels in at-risk populations for severe COVID-19, e.g., patients with diabetes.
The development of therapies to stabilize the GSN levels could hence be of direct therapeutic value for treating COVID-19.
Although decreased APOA1 levels have been observed in systemic inflammatory response (Kumaraswamy et al., 2012; Sirniö et al., 2017), including in COVID-19 (Nie et al., 2020), a potential explanation of the downregulation we observe here would also be provided, if naturally lower APOA1 and hence a different metabolic condition of the individual were associated with a higher risk of severe SARS-CoV-2 disease progression.
The raw data of the acquired commercial plasma and serum control samples within the GS study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier Pride:PXD018874.
Sampling was performed as part of the Pa-COVID-19 study, a prospective observational cohort study assessing pathophysiology and clinical characteristics of patients with COVID-19 at Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin (Kurth et al., 2020).
The study assesses epidemiological and demographic parameters, medical history, clinical course, morbidity and quality of life during hospital stay of COVID-19 patients.
Treatment and medical interventions follow standard of care as recommended by current international and German guidelines for COVID-19.
The Pa-COVID-19 study is carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki and the principles of Good Clinical Practice (ICH 1996) where applicable and was approved by the ethics committee of Charité- Universitätsmedizin Berlin (EA2/066/20).
Human UniProt (UniProt Consortium, 2019) isoform sequence database (3AUP000005640) was used to annotate the library.
The library was first automatically refined based on the dataset in question at 0.01 global q-value (using the “Generate spectral library” option in DIA-NN).
As we were specifically interested in proteins which could serve as biomarkers of COVID-19 severity, the test was performed using the Kendall’s Tau test for the Theil-Sen trend estimator (as implemented in the EnvStats R package (Millard, 2014)) against the disease severity as classified according to the WHO ordinal scale (Table S1).
In the case of this dataset, however, we observed very significant differences in the variance, e.g. many proteins seem a lot more variable between patients with severe and critical COVID-19 than mild COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented global challenge, and point-of-care diagnostic classifiers are urgently required.
We use our platform on samples collected from a cohort of early hospitalized cases of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and identify 27 potential biomarkers that are differentially expressed depending on the WHO severity grade of COVID-19.
In total, this work supports the development of routine proteomic assays to aid clinical decision making and generate hypotheses about potential COVID-19 therapeutic targets.
A standardized, ultra-high-throughput clinical platform for serum and plasma proteomics    •  Platform enables high precision quantification of 180 human proteomes per day at low cost    •  27 biomarkers are differentially expressed between WHO severity grades for COVID-19    •  Biomarkers include proteins not previously associated with COVID-19 infection      Messner et al. present a standardized, low-cost, ultra-high-throughput platform for serum and plasma proteomics designed for clinical use and apply it to a cohort of hospitalized COVID-19 patients.
They identify 27 potential biomarkers that are differentially expressed depending on the WHO severity grade of COVID-19.