However, a recent meta-analysis of six clinical studies involving 1,687 COVID-19 patients provided evidence that individuals with diabetes exhibited a similar prevalence of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 as the overall population, but presence of diabetes was a critical comorbidity that increased the risk of a poor outcome (4).
Certain racial groups such as African Americans and Native Americans are highly prone to developing diabetes and experience disparities in health care making them particularly vulnerable to COVID-19 (5).
However, to date there is a paucity of data regarding comorbidities, COVID-19 outcomes, and mechanisms that modulate viral pathogenesis.
In this Perspective, we bring attention to specific factors that may complicate COVID-19 in individuals with diabetes including 1) the presence of bone marrow changes (myeloidosis) that predispose those with diabetes to an excessive proinflammatory response (cytokine storm) and contribute to insulin resistance and reduced vascular repair, and worsening function of the heart, kidney, and systemic vasculature as a whole; 2) increased circulating furin levels that could cleave the spike protein and increase infectivity of SARS-CoV-2; 3) dysregulated autophagy that may promote replication and/or reduce viral clearance; and 4) gut dysbiosis that leads to widespread systemic inflammation, increased gut glucose and sodium absorption, and reduced tryptophan and other key amino acid absorption needed for incretin secretion and glucose homeostasis.
Central to each of these dysfunctions is the dysregulated RAS, in particular, the global loss of ACE2, which we propose is a unifying mechanism that could lead to the increased risk of morbidity and mortality in individuals with diabetes presenting with COVID-19.
Notably, COVID-19 patients exhibit increased serum levels of Ang-II (6), which would support less cleavage by ACE2 and thus potentially less ACE2 activity.
Emerging COVID-19 gastrointestinal disturbances implicate a central role of intestinal pathophysiology in exacerbation of hyperglycemia and blood pressure in individuals with diabetes infected with SARS-CoV-2.
ACE2 was discovered in 2000 (7), just 2–3 years before the first wave of SARS-CoV coronavirus pandemic, when ACE2 was identified as the major SARS-CoV “receptor” on host cells.
The structure of the hACE2 was replotted from pdb ID: 1R42 (50).
The structure of the hACE2 bound to SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD) was replotted from pdb ID: 6M0J (19).
High hACE2 expression in the nasal epithelium is consistent with clinical observations that symptomatic individuals with COVID-19 present with a higher viral load in the nasal cavity compared with the throat (10) and that some COVID-19 patients complain of inability to smell (13).
The hACE2-expressing nasal epithelium may provide an “intermediate site” for viral replication before its invasion of the lungs to cause symptomatic COVID-19 and may serve as a sanctuary niche for SARS-CoV-2 survival without spreading to the lungs in human subjects, thus perhaps permitting asymptomatic human-to-human transmission.
The structure of the homotrimeric SARS-CoV-2 spike protein complex was replotted from pdb ID: 6VYB (15).
As COVID-19 progresses, SARS-CoV-2 may also involve the lytic release pathway for newly produced viral particles, bypassing the budding process utilizing the furin-containing Golgi compartments (Fig. 4).
At this stage of COVID-19, extracellular furin may be utilized to complete the cleavage of spike protein’s furin cleavage sites, facilitating the virus spread in the infected host.
Additionally, nonstructural protein 6 (nsp6) of SARS-CoV-2 can generate autophagosomes, and an associated mutation in nsp6 is identified in COVID-19 patients (4,24).
Given the strong association between the RAS and autophagy, both may serve as therapeutic targets to ablate SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication, and this may further explain the possible beneficial effects of ACE inhibitors/ATR blockers in the treatment of COVID-19, discussed further below.
Several mechanisms may contribute to increased severity of COVID-19 progression in subjects with diabetes.
Diabetes-associated bone marrow dysfunction and loss of vascular reparative cells, such as CACs, may contribute to vascular dysfunction in COVID-19 patients that can be manifested as cardiac disease including arrhythmias, viral myocarditis, heart failure, and cardiac arrest (34–36).
In COVID-19 patients, the prevalence of kidney disease on admission and the development of acute kidney injury during hospitalization is high and associated with in-hospital mortality (37).
The loss of ACE2 via ADAM17 proteolytic cleavage, which is strongly activated in COVID-19 patients, will likely promote further injury to the cardiovascular system and kidneys in patients with diabetes (7,38).
While the lung is not considered a target tissue for diabetic complications, COVID-19 patients with diabetes experience worse pulmonary disease than those without diabetes.
ARDS triggers multiple pulmonary diseases and is observed in COVID-19 patients.
The recent demonstration of SARS-CoV-2 actively infecting human enterocytes and the mounting gastrointestinal symptomology implicate gastrointestinal tract pathophysiology in COVID-19 infection (12,39).
Data coordinates were obtained from pdb ID: 6M17 (18).
In the patient with diabetes infected with COVID-19, developing pneumonia can be devastating, as preexisting systemic inflammation can rapidly lead to multiple organ failure.
Inflammatory cytokine storm is a notable cause of death in critically ill COVID-19 patients and may be driven as much by gut-induced inflammation as lung injury.
These results provide proof of concept for feasibility of using engineered probiotic species as a live vector for delivery of decoy hACE2 for possible treatment of enteric COVID-19 infection.
Collectively, these results show that DIZE downregulates proinflammatory cytokine production by many distinct cell types and suggest that this drug may provide benefit to COVID-19 patients by reducing pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis, gut inflammation, and cytokine storm.
Individuals with diabetes suffering from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) exhibit increased morbidity and mortality compared with individuals without diabetes.
We put forth the hypothesis that during this process, reduced ACE2 could result in clinical deterioration in COVID-19 patients with diabetes via aggravating Ang-II–dependent pathways and partly driving not only lung but also bone marrow and gastrointestinal pathology.