It is believed that this is the same virus as that also called SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19 virus after the disease now designated COVID-19.
At the time of final writing of this text, the WHO named the disease COVID-19, so one can reasonably speak of the “COVID-10” or “Covid-19 virus”.
Renaming the believed causative agent of COVID-19 to indicate it as a type of SARS does not alleviate the concern that different strains use different mechanisms: very few point mutations might change the modes of cell entry.
The very recent close match with a SARS virus entry in the databases makes the assumptions used in the present paper much more plausible, however.
It shows that after circa 150 arbitrarily selected proteins are brought into the training set., the predictions begin to change and improve dramatically as more and more homologous proteins of similar folded structure are encountered and the coverage of sampled proteins spans the commoner protein families Obvious pre-known homologues were discarded in that study [34], but the above concern still applies.
ID:ALB35880.1 the internal match with the FIEDLL motif is not significant and the NVL and following sequence usually carry no cleavage arginine R at the corresponding point.
TLADAGFIKQYGDCTo compare, an alternative to the part in brackets is RRSFIDELAFGRG: it is an example of a tentative specific design “hunch” based on a section of a human semaphorin (GenBank NP_001243276.1) produced in response to lung diseases, a suggestive biologically-related match with conservative replacements but not one suggested by the general rules and probably coincidental.
Early alternative choices of binding protein as model included growth hormone secretagogue receptor type 1 GenPept accession NP_796304 because of some evidence in the literature of the action of anthraquinone, emoghrelin derivatives, and indanthrone, amongst others, which have some of the features of emodin, and because of an initial suspicion that a sequence segment in growth hormone receptor might contribute to binding and had some features relating to the current peptide of interest, but none of the alternatives were ultimately seen as persuasive as the steroid dehydrogenase choice.
This paper concerns study of the genome of the Wuhan Seafood Market isolate believed to represent the causative agent of the disease COVID-19.
Highlights     •  Bioinformatics studies are carried out on the COVID-19 virus.    •