The ability to rapidly connect with scientists in spite of institutional shutdowns has, on top of this, facilitated the engagement of researchers in collaborative activities targeted against COVID-19.
The European COVID-19 Data Portal [6], announced by the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen on 20 April 2020, for example, is setting out to help scientists coordinate the sharing of research data related to the fight against COVID-19 using the European Open Science Cloud.
Additional activities include new global efforts that aim to sequence SARS-CoV-2 viral genomes along with patient-matched host genomes or to utilize existing cohorts such as the UK Biobank [7], in order to dissect the role of host genetics in the COVID-19 disease course.
On top of this, new international platforms such as Crowdfight COVID-19 [8] or data against COVID-19 [9] aim to empower scientists to work together in fighting SARS-CoV-2, by connecting expertise from different fields with data resources.
Another example is a regular workshop series hosted by the European Laboratory of Intelligent Systems (ELLIS), which seeks to connect the expertise of leading researchers in machine learning and artificial intelligence for the fight against COVID-19.
Although 49% of scientists reported that their research hours have been reduced during the COVID-19 outbreak, many indicated that they are using the times of shutdown to devote more time to data analysis (43%), manuscript or thesis writing (45%), or developing grant applications (11%) (see Fig. 1).
Indeed, there are early signs that manuscript submissions to scientific journals have already been increasing since COVID-19-related restrictions have emerged [4].
And somewhat impressively, over a hundred respondents (102, 18% of the total) indicated that they shifted the regular scientific activities to be able to directly contribute to research with the aim to combat COVID-19.
A recent inquiry circulated among members of the European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO) provides an independent testament of the willingness of life scientists to contribute to fighting COVID-19 (https://www.data-against-covid.org).