This set of identified DEGs was firstly evaluated in databases comprising hotspot genes known to be involved in aging and various lung diseases (COPD, pneumonia, pulmonary fibrosis, and asthma, etc.).
An overlap of the DEGs with genes in the database indicated that aging is a major contributing factor for chronic respiratory diseases and infection (Fig. 2b; Supplementary information, Fig. S3a).
These data identified AT1 and AT2 as susceptible cell types for COVID-19 in the lung.
Alarming findings report that COVID-19 causes pervasive endotheliitis and blood clots, and viral particles have been detected in endothelial cells of COVID-19 victims.
We focused our attention on IL7, as our bulk RNA-seq analysis had revealed that IL7 was not only commonly upregulated in the aged lung (P value = 0.024), heart (P value = 0.058), and aorta (P value = 0.006) (Fig. 6a–c; Supplementary information, Fig. S8), but was also among the cytokines that drive the immune overreaction known as cytokine storm in patients with COVID-19 (Fig. 6a–c; Supplementary information, Table S6).
Altogether, these findings add new insights into ACE2 regulation in aged VECs and suggest that geroprotective strategies may reduce COVID-19 severity in the elderly.
In this study, we analyzed the single-nucleus transcriptomic maps of aged primate respiratory and cardiovascular tissues to understand the cellular and molecular basis for their vulnerabilities to age-related diseases and COVID-19 (Fig. 6k).
Altogether, we here depict the first transcriptomic atlas of the aged primate cardiopulmonary system, which provides mechanistic insights into how aging-related inflammation and susceptibility to microorganismal infection are interconnected to increase the vulnerability of older human to COVID-19.
HAECs were cultured in 6-well plates (Corning Incorporated, 3516) with EGM-2 medium to reach ~80% confluence.
Aging is a major risk factor for many diseases, especially in highly prevalent cardiopulmonary comorbidities and infectious diseases including Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Altogether, our findings depict the first transcriptomic atlas of the aged primate cardiopulmonary system and provide vital insights into age-linked susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that geroprotective strategies may reduce COVID-19 severity in the elderly.
The accession numbers for the raw snRNA-seq data reported in this paper in Genome Sequence Archive (GSA): CRA002577 (lung), CRA002689 (heart).
The accession numbers for the raw bulk RNA-seq data in GSA: CRA002810.