In December 2019, reports emerged of a cluster of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan City, China, culminating in the identification of a novel coronavirus on 12 January 2020, denoted as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), and the associated disease as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [1].
All COVID-19 papers drew heavily or exclusively on data and experience from China.
Abbreviations: COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; HDAS, Healthcare Databases Advanced Search; MERS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus; PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses; SARS-CoV, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; WHO, World Health Organization.
Children are affected by COVID-19, but extant data (largely case series from China) suggest they are less likely to be affected than adults.
The Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on COVID-19 [7] concludes that “we cannot determine the extent of infection among children, what role children play in transmission, whether children are less susceptible or whether they simply present differently.”
In an early epidemiological analysis of 507 COVID-19 cases, mainly from China, 13 (2.6%) were younger than 15 years, and the relative risk of COVID-19 in children was less than 0.5 compared with the population average [10].
Symptoms of COVID-19 are nonspecific and disease presentation ranges from asymptomatic to severe pneumonia and death [7].
Wei et al [9] identified all hospitalized infants in China diagnosed with COVID-19 infection between 8 December 2019 and 6 February 2020.
In Singapore, a well 6-month-old infant with COVID-19 and high viral load was detected as part of a cluster and was also asymptomatic throughout admission [16].
Asymptomatic cases are also reported in the English abstract of a Chinese paper, which reports clinical data and CT chest images of 15 children (aged 4–14 years old) diagnosed with COVID-19 in Shenzhen.
The Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on COVID-19 stated that 2.5% of the cases among those under 19 years old were severe and 0.2% were critical [7].
Among the 105 children admitted to Wuhan’s Children’s Hospital, the sole hospital for treating COVID-19 in children in Wuhan, 8 (7.6%) were reported to have severe disease [18].
Both parents developed symptomatic COVID-19 days after they looked after the sick infant without personal protective measures [12].
Nevertheless, we identify that children appear to be less affected by COVID-19 than adults by observed rate of infection; while 17.8% of the population were aged 0–15 years old, only 2.1% of reported cases in a large case series from China were in the 0–19-year age group [23].
Reliable evidence about clinical features and outcomes of COVID-19 in children is limited to small case series and case reports.
We detected only a weak signal that children with comorbidities are at increased risk or are overrepresented among pediatric COVID-19 cases.
Given that poor COVID-19 outcomes have been seen in adults with underlying conditions, a similar issue in children might be anticipated when sufficient data are available.
One study attempts to assess the impact of Hong Kong’s public health measures and population behavior change on COVID-19 transmission, using routine influenza surveillance data as a proxy, assuming that influenza and COVID-19 are likely transmitted in similar ways [25].
The authors demonstrate the substantial impact that familiar public health measures (including school closure), social distancing, and behavioral change could have in slowing down COVID-19 transmission, although questions remain about whether these measures can avoid fatigue and be sustained in the long term.
While the evidence we reviewed related mainly to data from China, as the COVID-19 pandemic spreads worldwide data are beginning to emerge from other countries, including Italy [26], South Korea [27], Iceland [28], and the United States [29].
Abstract   Background  Few pediatric cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have been reported and we know little about the epidemiology in children, although more is known about other coronaviruses.
We searched 3 databases and the COVID-19 resource centers of 11 major journals and publishers.
Twenty-four studies relating to COVID-19 were included in the review.
Children appear to be less affected by COVID-19 than adults by observed rate of cases in large epidemiological studies.
Conclusions  Children appear to have a low observed case rate of COVID-19 but may have rates similar to adults of infection with SARS-CoV-2.
This discrepancy may be because children are asymptomatic or too mildly infected to draw medical attention and be tested and counted in observed cases of COVID-19.
Initial reports from China observed low rates of COVID-19 in children compared with adults.