Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was first reported from China in December, 2019.
Although Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) infections have a higher mortality rate than does COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2 spreads much more rapidly than MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
We have reported use of posterior oropharyngeal (deep throat) saliva for diagnosis and viral load monitoring in a cohort of 12 patients with COVID-19.
Here, we report use of self-collected posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples from patients with COVID-19, which avoids close contact between health-care workers and patients, for viral load monitoring.
If patients were intubated, we obtained endotracheal aspirate instead of posterior oropharynx saliva.6, 9, 10, 11 Our initial experience showed that such saliva samples are promising in viral load monitoring in patients with COVID-19.
Ten patients had severe COVID-19, of whom all required oxygen supplementation, and 13 patients had mild disease.
Chronic comorbidities were more common among patients with severe COVID-19 (seven [70%] patients with severe disease had chronic comorbidities vs four [31%] with mild disease), although this difference was not significant (table
).
A high viral load on presentation of COVID-19 was recorded in our cohort, even for patients who were hospitalised shortly after symptom onset.
Currently, no standard treatment is available for COVID-19.
Background  Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) causes severe community and nosocomial outbreaks.
We aimed to ascertain the serial respiratory viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in posterior oropharyngeal (deep throat) saliva samples from patients with COVID-19, and serum antibody responses.
We included patients with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19.
Unlike severe acute respiratory syndrome, patients with COVID-19 had the highest viral load near presentation, which could account for the fast-spreading nature of this epidemic.