It is already clear that maintaining services as usual during the COVID‐19 pandemic is, in many settings, no longer possible.
Colleagues in charge of services in the main childhood cancer center serving the Lombardy region, Northern Italy, have provided highly practical information on how they have managed to deliver usual anticancer care while minimizing transmission of COVID‐19 (Supplement II).
The crucial factors for managing the overwhelming service demand included: (1) clear clinical leadership; (2) a dynamic standard operating procedure for the service; (3) SARS‐CoV‐2 viral testing of all staff and all patients prior to any elective procedures or admission; (4) professional monitoring of handwashing and the use of appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) by staff and families on entering and leaving clinical areas; (5) restricting accompanying persons to one per patient; (6) “cohorting” of staff for work and rest periods; (7) physical separation of oncology staff from staff working in COVID‐19 areas; and (8) elective reduction of high‐risk procedures (CAR‐T and stem cell therapies) to reduce the demand for intensive care services.
The emerging experience from regions with high community transmission SARS‐CoV‐2 suggests that an age‐related pattern of upper and lower respiratory tract syndromes of mild to moderate severity is the most common presentation of COVID‐19 in children, but with some reports of a very severe clinical disease with life‐threatening respiratory failure.
, 
, 
, 
, 
 COVID‐19 may also rarely manifest as a true systemic disease, including myocarditis, meningo‐encephalitis, macrophage activation syndrome, and thromboembolic phenomena.
At the time of manuscript preparation, data on the clinical spectrum and outcome of children with cancer and concurrent COVID‐19 are limited, and further data are awaited.
However, other coronaviruses can produce more severe disease in immunocompromised children with increased risk with coexisting pulmonary disease or concurrent lower respiratory tract infection.
, 
 Although this is not yet proven for SARS‐CoV‐2/COVID‐19, prolonged viral shedding (≥ 21 days) has been documented in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients for other human coronaviruses, particularly in the setting of steroid use, and myeloablative conditioning.
ALL is the most common single childhood cancer, with the longest duration of treatment; hence, many cancer services will experience some COVID‐19–related disruption to the care of children with ALL during the pandemic.
Few COVID‐19–positive ALL cases have been reported so far, and the clinical course of those that have been described is of a mild to moderately severe respiratory syndrome, although anecdotal reports of severe infections and fatal outcomes are emerging.
,
Thus, the major threat to children with ALL may be COVID‐19–related interruption of treatment, or in some settings, treatment noncompletion.
Children with concurrent COVID‐19 and hyperleukocytosis should commence immediate treatment with supportive care and a steroid prophase, and commence disease‐directed therapy on recovery from COVID‐19.
We do not recommend any elective modification of maintenance chemotherapy, but in high COVID‐19 prevalence regions, clinic visits should be minimized by extended dispensing of maintenance chemotherapy supported by virtual contact for clinical review.
In Supplement I, Table 1, we provide guidance for adapting patient care if the COVID‐19 pandemic disrupts access to diagnostic investigations and the supply of essential cancer chemotherapy.
At diagnosis in fully resourced and HIC settings with an emergency presentation, no pandemic modifications are recommended for the initial assessment and diagnosis, even if a child presents with concurrent COVID‐19.
The COVID‐19 pandemic may compromise the availability and access to the SOC investigations for a complete diagnosis, staging, and response evaluation for risk‐based therapy.
During this COVID‐19 pandemic, elements of these approaches may not be practical or possible, and there will likely be disruption to the timing of planned surgery and radiotherapy.
This may not be the case in countries with limited resources or in areas where access to operating theater and ICU is affected by the COVID‐19 situation.
The COVID‐19 pandemic will have a direct impact on radiotherapy resources, and all radiotherapy centers should have a contingency plan in place to deal with revised staffing and workflows at short notice
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and Supplement II.
Exposed team members are required to adhere to consensus guidelines, use airborne precaution PPE (e.g., N95 mask with face shield), and care for patients with suspected or confirmed COVID‐19 cases in designated operative and perioperative area.
,
Children with high‐risk cancers represent a particularly vulnerable population during this COVID‐19 pandemic, especially when it comes to palliative care needs.
These children are at increased risk for symptom‐related distress as well as psychological and emotional trauma as a result of the COVID‐19 crisis in addition to their already incredibly distress‐inducing cancer diagnosis.
COVID‐19 is leading to a surge in demand for healthcare services, including shifting resources and requiring uncomfortable conversations about resource allocation.
The potential role and response of palliative care and hospice services in this COVID‐19 pandemic are demonstrated in Supplement II and Supporting Information Table S9.
Nurses are on the frontlines of treating and preventing the spread of COVID‐19.
Hospital leaders should provide written, evidence‐based recommendations for infection prevention and control practices during the COVID‐19 crisis, including guidelines for hand hygiene, use of PPE, staff and visitor screening, isolation of symptomatic patients, and environmental disinfection protocols.
Nursing shortages due to COVID‐19 or other illnesses challenge appropriate care even in HIC,
 but threaten basic oncology care in LMICs.
Hospitals need rigorous policies and procedures for the screening, isolation, and care of patients and families at risk of or infected with COVID‐19.
Hospital cleaners must be trained and supervised in disinfecting patient care areas and equipment, and nursing staff must take particular care in handling patient excreta, soiled bedlinen etc. from patients with confirmed or suspected COVID‐19 infection.
Similar stringent precautions are required to protect the pediatric oncology clinical area and reduce transmission risks of COVID‐19 among its patients.
The Lombardy experience recommends the use of masks for all staff in pediatric oncology for all clinical encounters, with surgical masks for non COVID‐19 contact, reserving N95 masks for high‐risk clinical encounters such as aerosol‐generating procedures.
Advice on the use of PPE during the COVID‐19 pandemic is evolving and differs between countries.
The Food and Drug Administration,
 the National Cancer Institute's Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program,
 and the European Medicines Agency
 have provided recommendations on conducting research during the COVID‐19 pandemic.
The principles of these recommendations are captured in guidances provided by the COG and the European Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP‐E) including provision for telemedicine evaluations in place of clinical visits, remote dispensing of oral investigational agents, and acknowledging minor protocol deviations to reduce the risk of COVID‐19 spread among patients and medical providers.
There is a paucity of data on the clinical manifestations and outcome of COVID‐19 in children being treated for or having recently completed cancer.
Given the rarity and spectrum of childhood cancers, it is unlikely that any single center will see more than a few sporadic cases of COVID‐19.
To address the need for well‐curated clinical data, St Jude Global and SIOP have created a global COVID‐19 childhood cancer registry to learn more about the impact of the virus on childhood cancer patients worldwide and for us all to be better prepared to meet future similar challenges,
 St Jude Global and SIOP have put out a call for clinicians worldwide to voluntarily report any patient with a malignancy or prior hematopoietic stem cell transplant who is under the age of 19 at the time of a laboratory confirmed SARS‐CoV‐2 infection.
Also, to work with their public health colleagues to send a clear message to parents and communities, fear of COVID‐19 infection should not prevent seeking medical assessment if they have serious concerns about their child's health.
A full understanding of who is at risk of developing serious COVID‐19 disease and how to prevent and treat this can only come from a global effort to capture detailed prospective data.
More worrying is the potential for children with cancer to become indirect victims of the COVID‐19 pandemic, due to late diagnosis and disrupted therapies.
The COVID‐19 pandemic is one of the most serious global challenges to delivering affordable and equitable treatment to children with cancer we have witnessed in the last few decades.
This Special Report aims to summarize general principles for continuing multidisciplinary care during the SARS‐CoV‐2 (COVID‐19) pandemic.