The AFCD of Hong Kong stated: ‘Although there is no evidence yet that pets can transmit the virus to other pets or back to humans, we strongly advise that mammalian pets including dogs and cats from households with persons confirmed as infected with COVID-19 or as close contacts of COVID-19 infected persons should be put under quarantine in AFCD facilities to safeguard public and animal health.
Neither dog showed any signs of being ill with COVID-19.
The dog was 17 years old and had ongoing health issues that were likely responsible for the death of this dog, rather than COVID-19.
On March 19, the AFCD reported that a third dog, a German Shepherd Dog living with an owner testing positive for COVID-19, had also tested positive.
The decision to test will be made collaboratively between local, state, and federal animal and public health officials’, ‘After the decision is made to test, state animal health officials will designate a state-appointed veterinarian, USDA-accredited veterinarian, or foreign animal disease diagnostician to collect the sample using appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and sample collection methods’, ‘While we are recommending these as good practices, it is important to remember that, to date, there have not been any reports of pets or other animals becoming ill with SARS-CoV-2, and there is currently no evidence that pets can spread COVID-19 to other animals, including people’ (8).
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by COVID-19 virus.
However, because animals and people can sometimes share diseases (known as zoonotic diseases), it is still recommended that people who are sick with COVID-19 limit contact with companion and other animals until more information is known about the virus’ (9).
CDC advise ‘You should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would around other people.
Although there have not been reports of pets or other animals becoming sick with COVID-19, it is still recommended that people sick with COVID-19 limit contact with animals until more information is known about the virus.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including petting, snuggling, being kissed or licked, and sharing food.