Mitochondria are the primary sites for aerobic respiration and play a vital role in maintaining physiologic function at the cellular and organismal levels.
Physiologic mitochondrial homeostasis, functions, health, and any kind of mitochondrial impairments are associated with systemic effects that are linked to the human health and pathologies.
Contextually, mitochondria are acting as a natural vital biosensor in humans controlling status of physical and mental health in a holistic manner.
So far, no any disorder is known as happening to humans independently from a compromised mitochondrial health as the cause (primary mitochondrial dysfunction) or a target of collateral damage (secondary mitochondrial injury).
This certainty makes mitochondrial medicine be the superior instrument to reach highly ambitious objectives of predictive, preventive, and personalized medicine (PPPM/3PM).
3PM effectively implements the paradigm change from the economically ineffective reactive medical services to a predictive approach, targeted prevention and treatments tailored to individualized patient profiles in primary (protection against health-to-disease transition) and secondary (protection against disease progression) healthcare.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) properties differ significantly from those of nuclear DNA (nDNA).
For example, mtDNA as the cell-free DNA molecule is much more stable compared to nDNA, which makes mtDNA be an attractive diagnostic target circulating in human body fluids such as blood and tear fluid.
Further, genetic variations in mtDNA contribute to substantial individual differences in disease susceptibility and treatment response.
To this end, the current gene editing technologies, such as clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas, are still immature in mtDNA modification, and cannot be effectively applied in clinical practice posing a challenge for mtDNA-based therapies.
In contrast, comprehensive multiomics technologies offer new insights into mitochondrial homeostasis, health, and functions, which enables to develop more effective multi-level diagnostics and targeted treatment strategies.
This review article highlights health- and disease-relevant mitochondrial particularities and assesses involvement of mitochondrial medicine into implementing the 3PM objectives.
By discussing the interrelationship between 3PM and mitochondrial medicine, we aim to provide a foundation for advancing early and predictive diagnostics, cost-effective targeted prevention in primary and secondary care, and exemplify personalized treatments creating proof-of-concept approaches for 3PM-guided clinical applications.
