Ulcerative colitis(UC) is a recurrent, chronic, nonspecific inflammatory bowel disease.
The longer the course of the disease, the higher the risk of cancerization.
In recent years, the incidence and mortality rates of colon cancer in China have been increasing year by year, seriously threatening the life and health of patients.
Therefore, studying the mechanism of &quot;inflammation cancer transformation&quot; in UC and conducting early intervention is crucial.
The &quot;Kenang&quot; theory is an important component of traditional Chinese medicine(TCM) theory of phlegm and blood stasis.
It is based on the coexistence of phlegm and blood stasis in the body and deeply explores the pathogenic syndromes and characteristics of phlegm and blood stasis.
Kenang is a pathological product formed when long-term Qi stagnation leads to the internal formation of phlegm and blood stasis, which is hidden deep within the body.
It is characterized by being hidden, progressive, and difficult to treat.
The etiology and pathogenesis of &quot;inflammation cancer transformation&quot; in UC are consistent with the connotation of the &quot;Kenang&quot; theory.
The internal condition for the development of UC &quot;inflammation cancer transformation&quot; is the deficiency of healthy Qi, with Qi stagnation being the key pathological mechanism.
Phlegm and blood stasis are the main pathogenic factors.
Phlegm and blood stasis accumulate in the body over time and can produce cancer toxins.
Due to the depletion of healthy Qi and a weakened constitution, the body is unable to limit the proliferation and invasion of cancer toxins, eventually leading to cancer transformation in UC.
In clinical treatment, the focus should be on removing phlegm and blood stasis, with syndrome differentiation and treatment based on three basic principles: supporting healthy Qi to strengthen the body's foundation, resolving phlegm and blood stasis to break up the Kenang, and regulating Qi and blood to smooth the flow of energy and resolve stagnation.
This approach helps to dismantle the Kenang, delay, block, or even reverse the cancerization process of UC, reduce the risk of &quot;inflammation cancer transformation&quot;, improve the patient's quality of life, and provide new perspectives and strategies for early intervention in the development of colon cancer.
