This study aims to investigate the optimal ratio of Astragali Radix-Curcumae Rhizoma(AC) for inhibiting the proliferation of 143B osteosarcoma cells, and to investigate the mechanism by which AC inhibits osteosarcoma growth and metastasis through angiogenesis and cell adhesion mediated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3K)/protein kinase B(Akt)/hypoxia inducible factor-1α(HIF-1α) pathway.
A subcutaneous 143B tumor-bearing nude mouse model was successfully established and randomly divided into the model group, and the AC 1∶1, 2∶1, and 4∶1 groups.
Body weight, tumor volume, and tumor weight were recorded.
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction(RT-qPCR) and Western blot were used to detect the mRNA and protein expression levels of PI3K, Akt, phosphorylated Akt(p-Akt), HIF-1α, vascular endothelial growth factor A(VEGFA), transforming growth factor-β1(TGF-β1), epithelial cadherin(E-cadherin), neural cadherin(N-cadherin), vimentin, matrix metalloproteinase 2(MMP2), matrix metalloproteinase 9(MMP9), B-cell lymphoma-2(Bcl-2), Bcl-2-associated X protein(Bax), and caspase-3 in the hypoxic core region of the tumor tissue.
A cell hypoxia model was established, and the effects of AC-medicated serum(model group, AC 1∶1, 2∶1, and 4∶1 groups) on angiogenesis, proliferation, adhesion, invasion, and migration of 143B osteosarcoma cells were examined through CCK-8, flow cytometry, Transwell assay, cell adhesion assay, and HUVEC tube formation assay.
The results showed that compared with the model group, the tumor weight and volume were smallest in the 2∶1 group.
The expression levels of PI3K, Akt, p-Akt, HIF-1α, VEGFA, and TGF-β1 were significantly decreased, and the protein expression of E-cadherin was significantly increased, while the protein expression of N-cadherin, vimentin, MMP2, and MMP9 was significantly decreased.
Additionally, the protein expression of Bax and caspase-3 was significantly increased, and Bcl-2 protein expression was significantly decreased.
In vitro experiments showed that after intervention with AC-medicated serum at a 2∶1 ratio, the cell activity, adhesion, invasion, and migration of 143B cells were significantly reduced, apoptosis was significantly increased, and HUVEC tube formation was significantly decreased.
In conclusion, the 2∶1 ratio of AC showed the most effective inhibition of 143B cell growth.
AC can inhibit the growth and metastasis of osteosarcoma 143B cells by regulating the PI3K/Akt/HIF-1α signaling pathway, inhibiting angiogenesis and reducing cell adhesion, invasion, and migration.
