The present study aimed to develop and validate a fusion model based on multi-phase contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) radiomics features combined with clinical features to preoperatively predict the expression levels of Ki-67 in patients with gastric cancer (GC).
A total of 164 patients with GC who underwent surgical treatment at our hospital between September 2015 and September 2023 were retrospectively included and were randomly divided into a training set (n=114) and a testing set (n=50).
Using Pyradiomics, radiomics features were extracted from multi-phase CECT images and were combined with significant clinical features through various machine learning algorithms [support vector machine (SVM), random forest (RandomForest), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), LightGBM and XGBoost] to build a fusion model.
Receiver operating characteristic, area under the curve (AUC), calibration curve and decision curve analysis (DCA) were used to evaluate, validate and compare the predictive performance and clinical utility of the model.
Among the three single-phase models, for the arterial phase model, the SVM radiomics model had the highest AUC value in the training set, which was 0.697; and the RandomForest radiomics model had the highest AUC value in the testing set, which was 0.658.
For the venous phase model, the SVM radiomics model had the highest AUC value in the training set, which was 0.783; and the LightGBM radiomics model had the highest AUC value in the testing set, which was 0.747.
For the delayed phase model, the KNN radiomics model had the highest AUC value in the training set, which was 0.772; and the SVM radiomics model had the highest AUC in the testing set, which was 0.719.
The clinical feature model had the lowest AUC values in both the training set and the testing set, which were 0.614 and 0.520, respectively.
Notably, the multi-phase model and the fusion model, which were constructed by combining the clinical features and the multi-phase features, demonstrated excellent discriminative performance, with the fusion model achieving AUC values of 0.933 and 0.817 in the training and testing sets, thus outperforming other models (DeLong test, both P<0.05).
The calibration curve showed that the fusion model had goodness of fit (Hosmer-Lemeshow test, >0.5 in the training and validation sets).
The DCA showed that the net benefit of the fusion model in identifying high expression of Ki-67 was improved compared with that of other models.
Furthermore, the fusion model achieved an AUC value of 0.805 in the external validation data from The Cancer Imaging Archive.
In conclusion, the fusion model established in the present study was revealed to have excellent performance and is expected to serve as a non-invasive tool for predicting Ki-67 status and guiding clinical treatment.
