Breast cancer screening guidelines indicate screening in women over 75 years of age is optional, depending upon patient health and preferences.
To better understand the preferences and decision-making of older women, their experiences and perceptions concerning screening need to be linked to their intention to continue or discontinue screening.
This study used a qualitative comparative analysis to identify the characteristics and themes linked to the intention to continue or discontinue screening.
To capture the range of experiences and preferences, a purposive sample of community-residing adults (n = 59) was selected with equal representation of White, Black, and Hispanic women by age (70-74 years and 75 and older) and educational level (≤12 grade and >12 grade).
In-depth qualitative interviews explored women's perceptions of mammograms, the benefits and risks of screening, and personal screening experiences.
Interviews were coded and quality-checked by two or more coders.
A qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) identified combinations of personal characteristics and themes linked to the intention to continue (n = 32) or discontinue (n = 27) screening.
Results indicated personal experiences were strongly linked to the intention to continue or discontinue.
Women who mentioned recent screening (within three years) and either a spontaneously mentioned cancer story concerning a friend or family member or a doctor's screening recommendation intended to continue screening (91% true positive rate, model sensitivity).
Women who did not schedule screening and who did not mention a cancer story or a doctor's recommendation (or neither) intended to discontinue screening (81% true negative rate, model specificity).
These experiences transcended differences in race/ethnicity, age, and educational level.
Continuation of breast cancer screening in older women is motivated by their personal screening history combined with cancer experiences and/or a doctor's screening recommendation.
