Patients undergoing lung resection surgery (LRS) may experience various postoperative complications, which can be prevented or managed through physiotherapy interventions.
The current evidence concerning physiotherapy interventions for individuals undergoing LRS is inconsistent and disorganised.
Our objective is to outline the methods we will employ to collect, describe, and analyse studies that have assessed the effects of physiotherapy interventions in the immediate postoperative period for hospitalized adults undergoing LRS.
We will conduct our scoping review following the Joanna Briggs Institute.
We will include primary studies that have enrolled hospitalized adults undergoing LRS where the effects, efficacy, effectiveness or cost-effectiveness of postoperative physiotherapy interventions has been evaluated.
A systematic search of MEDLINE (Ovid), Embase (Ovid), CENTRAL (Cochrane Library), CINAHL (EBSCOhost), LILACS (BVS), and PEDro will be carried out.
Additionally, we will perform forward and backward citation searches.
Data selection and extraction will be done in duplicate.
Conflicts will be resolved by consensus or through a third reviewer.
We will utilise the Word Frequency Analyser, The Polyglot Search Translator, Citationchaser, and Catchii tools to enhance the efficiency of our review.
Outlining our strategies to conduct our review will help uphold scientific rigour and enable readers to identify any deviations from our plan.•We will conduct our scoping review following the Joanna Briggs Institute.
We will include primary studies that have enrolled hospitalized adults undergoing LRS and evaluated postoperative physiotherapy interventions' effects, efficacy, effectiveness or cost-effectiveness.•To enhance the efficiency of our review, we will use artificial intelligence tools such as Word Frequency Analyser, The Polyglot Search Translator, Citationchaser, and Catchii.•Understanding applications of postoperative physiotherapy interventions in hospitalized adults undergoing LRS can aid in implementing treatment strategies.
It will also highlight existing research gaps that require attention from primary studies.
