Laterally extended endopelvic resection (LEER) is a surgical option for patients with laterally recurrent gynecological malignancies to preserve sciatic nerve function [1].
However, when a laterally recurrent tumor involves the sacrum, debulking surgery is generally abandoned because the surgical excision line is outside the standard LEER.
Since its technical feasibility and oncological safety have been demonstrated, sacrectomy for recurrent rectal cancer is now considered the treatment of choice [2].
Theoretically, if complete resection is deemed possible, LEER and sacrectomy (beyond-LEER) may be the treatments of choice for recurrent gynecological malignancies.
However, the technical feasibility of beyond-LEER has not been reported.
In this video, we demonstrate the step-by-step procedure of laparoscopy-assisted beyond-LEER in a patient with platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer.
The patient, with stage IVA ovarian cancer, was in complete remission after debulking surgery and chemotherapy.
At the 13-month-platinum-free interval, a solitary recurrent tumor, involving the right internal iliac vessels and infiltrating the right sacral foramen (S3), was detected.
Thus, second-line chemotherapy was initially introduced.
During 6 months of chemotherapy, the tumor size remained unchanged and no other metastatic lesions were detected.
Therefore, surgical resection was planned.
Laparoscopy-assisted beyond-LEER was performed, and complete resection without tumor exposure was accomplished.
No sign of recurrence 9 months post debulking surgery has been noted.
This is the first report to demonstrate the technical feasibility of laparoscopy-assisted beyond-LEER.
Table 1 presents a comparison with cases wherein open total pelvic exenteration with low-sacrectomy (TPES) was performed for recurrent rectal cancer.
Forty-nine cases of open TPES demonstrated operation time, 11.5 hours; blood loss volume, 2,630 mL; and length of stay, 24.5 days [3].
These results are similar to the findings in our case: operation time, 11 hours; blood loss volume, 1,700 mL; and length of stay, 35 days.
We suggest that the benefit of laparoscopy cannot be demonstrated because TPES is a different procedure compared with the beyond LEER.
Kimura et al.
[4] demonstrated that laparoscopic TPES for recurrent rectal cancer might have a benefit of reduced blood loss.
The advantages of laparoscopy during our multidirectional procedure include not only the possibility of reducing blood loss but also the quick closure of abdominal wound and ease of keeping wound clean while changing patient's position during sacrectomy.
However, due to the limited case and follow up periods, further studies are required to determine the efficacy of this novel surgery and real advantage of laparoscopy.
The informed consent for use of this video was taken from the patient.
