Organotropism results from the functional versatility of metastatic cancer cells to survive and proliferate in diverse microenvironments.
This adaptivity can originate in clonal variation of the spreading tumor and is often empowered by epigenetic and molecular reprogramming of cell regulatory circuits.
Related to organotropic colonization of metastatic sites are environmentally-sensitive, differential responses of cancer cells to therapeutic attack.
Accordingly, understanding the organotropic profile of a cancer and probing the underlying driver mechanisms are of high clinical importance.
However, determining systematically the organotropism of one cancer versus the organotropism of another cancer, potentially with the granularity of comparing the same cancer type between patients or tracking the evolution of a cancer in a single patient for the purpose of personalized treatment, has remained very challenging.
It requires a host organism that allows observation of the spreading pattern over relatively short experimental times.
Moreover, organotropic patterns often tend to be statistically weak and superimposed by experimental variation.
Thus, an assay for organotropism must give access to statistical powers that can separate 'meaningful heterogeneity', i.e., heterogeneity that determines organotropism, from 'meaningless heterogeneity', i.e., heterogeneity that causes experimental noise.
Here we describe an experimental workflow that leverages the physiological properties of zebrafish larvae for an imaging-based assessment of organotropic patterns over a time-frame of 3 days.
The workflow incorporates computer vision pipelines to automatically integrate the stochastic spreading behavior of a particular cancer xenograft in tens to hundreds of larvae allowing subtle trends in the colonization of particular organs to emerge above random cell depositions throughout the host organism.
We validate our approach with positive control experiments comparing the spreading patterns of a metastatic sarcoma against non-transformed fibroblasts and the spreading patterns of two melanoma cell lines with previously established differences in metastatic propensity.
We then show that integration of the spreading pattern of xenografts in 40 - 50 larvae is necessary and sufficient to generate a
