Following the first case reports in Hubei province, China, in late 2019, a pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was declared by the World Health Organization in March 2020.
Although COVID-19 causes minimal or mild illness in most, a small but appreciable proportion of individuals require oxygen therapy and often admission to an intensive care unit (ICU).
The ensuing unprecedented pressure on hospital wards and ICUs has necessitated rapid re-deployment of staff and capacity towards the management of COVID-19 cases with deprioritisation of non-emergency clinical services, including diagnostics and elective specialist surgery.
ICU COVID-19 mortality, distribution by age and duration of stay and proportion referred into ICU were obtained from ICNARC (Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre) and data from hospitalised UK cases.
,
 Because of lack of UK data, data from Wuhan were used as the basis for the age distribution of community infection, age-specific likelihoods of admission from community to hospital and case fatality rates for non-ICU COVID-19 patients
,
 (see supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online).
To compare life-years associated with timely cancer surgery with those afforded by hospitalisation of COVID-19 patients, we modelled a volume of community-ascertained COVID-19 infection, resulting in an equivalent volume of hospital admissions to cancer surgeries (see supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online).
Accounting for nosocomial COVID-19 infection, for cancers with a relatively good overall prognosis, delay of surgery by 3 months had a minimal impact on survival: <1% for all stage 1 ER+ and HER2+ breast cancers, for example.
In older patients (aged >70), for early stage colorectal, kidney and ER+ breast cancers, the current impact on survival of COVID-related mortality exceeded the impact of 3 or even 6 months' delay (Table 2; see also supplementary Table S3, available at Annals of Oncology online).
Prior to the COVID-19 crisis, each year cancer surgery was directly responsible for 1 717 051 LYGs.
For contextualisation, we compare the impact of cancer surgery delay with hospital care for patients with community-acquired COVID-19 infection.
COVID-19 ICU admission for those aged 40–49 yielded on average 27.5 LYGs and 0.8 RALYGs.
These estimates are inherently conservative as they do not take into account the impact on life expectancy of the excess comorbidities associated with many hospitalised COVID-19 cases.
COVID-19 community-acquired infection of 683 083 individuals would result in 94 912 hospital admissions (i.e. the equivalent number to number of annual admissions for cancer surgery; Table 4).
This represents on average 5.08 LYGs and 0.46 RALYGs per hospitalised COVID-19 patient.
This will serve to minimise nosocomial acquisition and mortality from COVID-19, to protect staff and also to provide reassurance to the public regarding uptake of diagnostics and surgery for cancer.
Background  Cancer diagnostics and surgery have been disrupted by the response of health care services to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
Using health care resource costing, we contextualise attributable lives saved and life-years gained (LYGs) from cancer surgery to equivalent volumes of COVID-19 hospitalisations.
For 94 912 hospital COVID-19 admissions, there are 482 022 LYGs requiring 1 052 949 HCRUs.
Hospitalisation of community-acquired COVID-19 patients yields on average per patient 5.08 LYG and 0.46 RALYGs.
Delay of 3/6 months in surgery for incident cancers would mitigate 19%/43% of LYGs, respectively, by hospitalisation of an equivalent volume of admissions for community-acquired COVID-19.
Highlights     •  Lockdown and re-deployment due to the COVID-19 pandemic have caused significant disruption to cancer diagnosis and management.
The resource-adjusted benefit in avoiding delay in cancer management compares favourably with admission for COVID-19 infection.