Some groups seem particularly vulnerable to severe COVID-19, notably the elderly and those with existing health conditions.
Apparent familial or heritable variations in susceptibility to disease have long been recognized, for example in relation to tuberculosis, malaria, leprosy, and HIV, and preliminary reports are emerging in relation to COVID-19.
,
The scientific community has acted rapidly to establish the COVID-19 Host Genetics initiative, which includes 127 studies in a global collaboration to investigate the genomes of those infected by coronavirus.
Leading commercial genetic companies have also launched studies of COVID-19 susceptibility, drawing on their substantial privately held data sets.
This commentary highlights the need for COVID-19 host genetics to engage with questions related to the role of genetic susceptibility factors in creating potential inequalities in the ability to work or access public space, stigma, and inequalities in the quality and scope of data.
It may also enable employers to extend steps to protect staff, minimize the likelihood of workplace illness, and help them maintain a healthy workforce, for example in line with recommendations from the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission on COVID-19.
However, here COVID-19 research encounters well-described challenges associated with the population distribution of genetic data, and the consequent privileging of specific groups in genetic analyses.
The data sets used for genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are skewed toward Northern European ancestry populations, who account for nearly 80% of individuals in GWAS catalogs—with 70% of participants recruited from the UK, United States, and Iceland alone.
,
Inequalities in existing genetic data sets have implications for efforts to understand genetic influences on susceptibility to COVID-19, to predict which groups are most likely to be affected, and to estimate the wider prevalence of identified variants.
This is not a problem unique to COVID research.
Such problems may compound existing concerns related to the quality of data underpinning existing COVID-19 diagnostic and predictive models, and the absence of relevant features, including ethnicity, from clinical data sets.
,
Given emerging evidence of ethnic and gender differences related to COVID consequences, it is essential that host genetic analyses build on this progress to ensure the collection of data of sufficient scale, scope, and quality to provide equitable access to benefits that accrue from research.