Aging leads to numerous physiological changes, including the deterioration of the immune system, rendering the elderly more susceptible to infections, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and poor responses to vaccines (Ciabattini et al., 2018; Alpert et al., 2019; Onder et al., 2020; Verity et al., 2020).
We also enrolled young and aged COVID-19 patients in the incipient stage and recovery stage to explore how age influenced the capacity for recovery and prognosis of COVID-19 infection and to better understand the influence of immune dysregulation in aging and infection.
Most impressively, COVID-19 caused similar immune cell landscape changes to that of aging and further increased aging-induced immune cell polarization and upregulation of inflammatory genes.
To generate a comprehensive immune cell atlas reflecting cellular and systemic adaptations resulting from age and/or COVID-19 infection, we integrated scRNA-seq, CyTOF, scATAC-seq and scTCR/BCR-seq of single-cell PBMC suspensions collected from 3 separate cohorts (Fig. 1A, 1B, and Table S1A–G).
In cohort-1, comprising young healthy adults (YA) (20–45 years old) and aged healthy adults (AA) (≥60 years old), we combined CyTOF (n = 10) and scATAC-seq (n = 10) with scRNA-seq (n = 16) and scTCR/BCR-seq (n = 16); in cohort-2, comprising young healthy (YH) individuals (30–45 years old), aged healthy (AH) individuals (≥60 years old), young COVID-19 onset patients (YCO) (30–50 years old) and aged COVID-19 onset patients (ACO) (≥70 years old), we performed CyTOF analysis (n = 8); and in cohort-3, comprising YH individuals, AH individuals, young recovered COVID-19 patients (YCR) (30–50 years old) and aged recovered COVID-19 patients (ACR) (≥70 years old), we performed scRNA-seq (n = 22) (Fig. 1B).
In cohort-2, we measured single-cell protein expression using a 26-marker CyTOF panel to discover early cellular changes in incipient COVID-19 patients and how those changes were affected by age.
Finally, in cohort-3, we compared cellular differences between young and aged recovered COVID-19 patients by scRNA-seq analysis (Fig. 1B).
To depict how the immune landscape changes with aging and SARS-CoV-2 infection, we enrolled young (YCO, n = 2) and aged (ACO, n = 2) patients with incipient COVID-19 (to assess the acute inflammatory state) in cohort-2 and young (YCR, n = 2) and aged (ACR, n = 2) patients who had recovered from COVID-19 (to assess the recovered state) in cohort-3.
We first compared the peripheral immune cell composition between COVID-19 patients (at the onset stage, CO) and their age-matched healthy controls (HC).
Importantly, the aging-associated increase in MCs and decrease in TCs were amplified by COVID-19 in aged patients compared with healthy aged controls (Fig. 6I).
Notably, we found a higher ratio of MCs, especially inflammatory MCs, and a lower percentage of TCs in aged COVID-19 patients than young COVID-19 patients (Figs. 6O and S12N).
The patients in cohort-2 were diagnosed with severe COVID-19 and presented with similar clinical symptoms and CT findings.
Aged COVID-19 patients had more MCs and fewer TCs than young patients, thus lowering the threshold of developing hyperinflammatory states that may trigger cytokine storms and lymphopenia.
To determine how an increased MCs population and decreased TCs population at the onset of SARS-CoV-2 infection contribute to faster disease progression in the elderly at the cellular and molecular levels, we used scRNA-seq to investigate the association between aging and COVID-19.
Specifically, we analyzed DEGs to explore whether differentially expressed SARS-CoV-2-related genes in aged patients could explain the impact that aging had on the susceptibility and recovery of COVID-19 patients in cohort-3 (Figs. S13A–C and S14A).
Anti-CD147 antibody has been tested to treat COVID-19 patients with promising effects (Bian et al., 2020).
Altered expression of these molecules in circulating immune cells, especially in CD4 Naive, with age might contribute to increased susceptibility and severity of COVID-19 in the elderly.
Our data demonstrated that the inflammatory response was sustained in the blood environment of COVID-19 patients recovering from SARS-CoV-2 infection (Wen et al., 2020).
In the recovery stage, the aging-associated increase in MCs and decrease in TCs were amplified by COVID-19 in aged covered patients compared with healthy aged controls.
The results showed that COVID-19 amplifies aging-induced upregulation of inflammatory genes and senescence hallmark genes (CDKN family) (López-Otín et al., 2013).
These findings indicate that aged people have a slower recovery from COVID-19 than young people.
Here, we depicted such an atlas from PBMCs harvested from healthy young and old research subjects and young and old patients with COVID-19.
Our data suggest that increased numbers of MCs may contribute to cytokine storms in coronavirus infection, as indicated by increased numbers of MCs during aging and further increases in COVID-19, whereas TCs that are critical for virus clearance (Hickman et al., 2015; Herzig et al., 2019) were decreased during aging and further reduced in COVID-19.
In addition, the polarization from naive to effector cells was further enhanced by SARS-CoV-2 infection in COVID-19.
Inflammatory genes such as IL1B, TNF, and CXCL8 were also increased during aging and were further upregulated in COVID-19.
Collectively, these findings reveal that aging reprograms the landscape of human immune cells toward polarized and inflammatory states and thus increases the susceptibility of COVID-19 in the elderly.
In turn, COVID-19 causes more “aging” of polarization and inflammatory states in immune cells.
Furthermore, we reveal novel aging-related genes and adaptive immune dysregulation, thus defining the potential contributions of aging-related immune cell disorganization to the high severity rate of aged COVID-19 patients (Fig. 8).
Here, we combined scRNA-seq, mass cytometry and scATAC-seq to compare immune cell types in peripheral blood collected from young and old subjects and patients with COVID-19.
Notably, COVID-19 promoted age-induced immune cell polarization and gene expression related to inflammation and cellular senescence.
Therefore, these findings suggest that a dysregulated immune system and increased gene expression associated with SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility may at least partially account for COVID-19 vulnerability in the elderly.