To identify all relevant variants of ACE2, we performed a search in multiple databases and created workflow for assembling the variants in complex with the SARS-CoV-2 RBD (Fig. 1).
XXXX stands for the PDB ID from which the model was extracted, R1 is the one-letter residue code of the native residue of the ACE2 receptor, NUM is the residue number according to the Uniprot sequence of human ACE2 receptor and R2 is the one-letter residue code of the variant to which the residue R1 was changed.
Variants in the 3 datasets are distinct, showing minor overlap in terms of amino acid substitution (Fig. 2a).
The computational alanine scanning shows a minor overlap with reported mutagenesis studies, where only 13% of the total mutations can be found in both datasets.
The experimental Procko dataset (PROCKO).
Interestingly, overlap of those data with the 3 datasets described above is minor (78 common out of 242 mutations) (Fig. 4).
Due to the higher risk of severe COVID-19 symptoms manifesting in cancer patients, we have specifically focused on retrieving genetic variants of ACE2 available in COSMIC v91 (Fig. 4).
ACE2 mutations from COVID-19 patients included in LOVD 3.0 (Fig. 4).
LOVD 3.0 reports additional variants for the ACE2 receptor and includes the N720D mutation which has been identified as a variant in COVID-19 patients in the Italian population.
N720D is found in genomic data (gnomAD), cancer (COSMIC v91) and COVID-19 patients (LOVD 3.0).
Another ACE2 protein variation identified in COVID-19 patients is the K26R, which is also included in the gnomAD data, but not in cancer patients.
Our dataset includes 140 variants of human ACE2 representing missense mutations found in genome-wide studies, 39 mutants with reported effects on the recognition of the RBD, and 63 predictions after computational alanine scanning mutagenesis of ACE2-RBD interface residues.
This dataset will help accelerate the design of therapeutics against SARS-CoV-2, as well as contribute to prevention of possible future coronaviruses outbreaks.