Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a pandemic infection caused by a positive-sense RNA betacoronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiorgan dysfunction are among the leading causes of death in critically ill patients with COVID-19.
Elevated concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines including interleukin (IL)-2, IL-6, interferon gamma–induced protein 10, macrophage inflammatory protein alpha, monocyte chemotactic protein 1 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) [1,2] suggest that a cytokine release syndrome may play a major role in the pathology of COVID-19.
Given the limited number of cases analysed, these findings could simply be due to chance; however, it also adds to other evidence suggesting that ICIs are protective rather than harmful in patients with COVID-19.
There is increasing recognition that a state of impaired host immunity accompanied by a significant cell degeneration in secondary lymphoid tissues follows the initial hyperinflammatory phase of COVID-19.
First, critically ill high-risk patients with COVID-19 often present with lymphocytopenia:
Second, patients with COVID-19 have high levels of serum IL-6, IL-10 and TNF-α and express increased levels of exhaustion markers PD-1 and T-cell immunoglobulin mucin-3 on the surface of their peripheral T cells, which in turn impair T-cell effector functions and prevent functional memory [9].
Finally, compared with cases of pneumonia not caused by SARS-CoV-2, patients with COVID-19 have decreased B cell and Th counts but a comparable number of the main cytokine storm (CS) players including monocytes, neutrophils and natural killer cells [10].
These latest data suggest that viral damage is direct rather than inflammatory driven and strongly supports the use of immune-activating drugs that have been little considered to date for fear of exacerbating the inflammatory reaction and causing a CS.
Currently, there are no finally verified data and no antiviral drugs licensed by the US Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency for treating patients with COVID-19 or for managing their complications.
Since its first outbreak in China, COVID-19 was empirically treated with antiviral and respiratory supportive therapies mainly agents already used in prior SARS epidemics.
Thus, this provides an opportunity for the research community to better outline the value of immune-modulating agents in the treatment of COVID-19.
Based on the promising results from an open-label study in 21 patients with severe and critical COVID-19 [16], tocilizumab—a human monoclonal antibody that binds to both soluble and membrane-bound IL-6 receptors (IL-6Rs)—is currently being investigated to address cytokine release syndrome in patients with severe ARDS, which includes randomised, controlled trials (ChiCTR2000029765; NCT04320615) and single-arm trials (ChiCTR2000030796; NCT04317092).
Genetic differences in HLA alleles have been recently recognised to confer differential viral susceptibility and severity of COVID-19 [19].
These findings highlight that genetic variability in the immune system may affect susceptibility to (and severity of) SARS-CoV-2; therefore, strategies to boost immune responses at this stage are certainly important for individuals particularly vulnerable to COVID-19.
While confirmed cases of the deadly coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have exceeded 4.7 million globally, scientists are pushing forward with efforts to develop vaccines and treatments in an attempt to slow the pandemic and lessen the disease's damage.
Although no proven effective therapies for treating patients with COVID-19 or for managing their complications currently exist, the rapidly expanding knowledge regarding severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 and its interplay with hosts provides a significant number of potential drug targets and the potential to repurpose drugs already tested in other diseases.