After the announcement by the UK Government on March 23, 2020, of implementation of a nationwide lockdown to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, hospital referrals for non-COVID-19-related illnesses have decreased substantially.
As the lockdown is lifted, a surge in presentations for non-COVID-19-related medical issues is anticipated.
For the calculation of the case-fatality rate associated with unselected COVID-19 infection, we used published data from China because UK COVID-19 case-fatality rate estimates were only available for patients who had been admitted to hospital.
To calculate COVID-19-related mortality in patients with cancer, we first estimated peri-surgical mortality from nosocomial infection as the product of operation-specific duration of surgical admission, age-specific case-fatality rates, and the rate of nosocomial infection per day (1%, 2%, 5%, or 10%).
Then we estimated COVID-19-related mortality in the community ascribing the patient a year of active cancer management status; this estimate was the product of the likelihood of community-acquired COVID-19 during the year (1%, 10%, 20%, or 50%), age-specific case-fatality rates, and the increase in COVID-19 case-fatality rate as a consequence of cancer as a comorbidity (two times or five times).
To estimate 10-year survival for individuals diagnosed with stage I–III cancer who have no delay in treatment, we used NCRAS 10-year survival data and adjusted for COVID-19-related peri-surgical and community mortality.
To estimate 10-year survival associated with delay, we applied the delay HR relating to the specified number of days of delay, along with the COVID-19-related peri-surgical and community mortality, to the NCRAS 10-year survival (formulas are in appendix 1 [pp 1–3]).
We combined per-day rates of nosocomial infection with the age-specific COVID-19 case-fatality rates to quantify the COVID-19-related fatality associated with investigatory referral.
Unless otherwise specified, we applied the default values for likelihood of community-acquired COVID-19, which was 20%, and per-day rate of nosocomial infection, which was 2%, which were selected to be conservatively high.
For cancer-related increase in mortality due to community-acquired COVID-19, we used a default value of two times, which is at the low-to-intermediate end of the published estimates (reflecting a non-metastatic cancer population; appendix 1 p 1).
Issues of capacity and delays in diagnosis are of global interest as part of moving towards benchmarked metrics (eg, International Cancer Benchmarking Partnership).3, 23
Our analyses at the level of referral are subject to the limitations of data collection for diagnostic-conversion rates, which were only available at the level of tumour-referral group, precluding analyses specific to age stratum or tumour type-specific symptomatology.
The severity of local COVID-19 patterns, method-specific diagnostic capacity, and organisation of cancer services will all have an effect, as will local variation in pathway innovations in both diagnostics (FIT triage, colonography) and treatment (a priori use of radiotherapy and hormonal treatments).
Background  During the COVID-19 lockdown, referrals via the 2-week-wait urgent pathway for suspected cancer in England, UK, are reported to have decreased by up to 84%.
Using referral-to-diagnosis conversion rates and COVID-19 case-fatality rates, we also estimated the survival increment per patient referred.