At the end of December 2019, an outbreak of a respiratory disease affecting humans in China was reported., A few days after the outbreak was announced, the causal agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was identified as severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a novel betacoronavirus.
COVID-19 affects people of all ages, most of whom will develop mild to moderate symptoms.
Most people with COVID-19 (84%) develop a mild or uncomplicated illness.
For COVID-19 patients admitted to ICU, the disease can be complicated by acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS), sepsis and septic shock, and multi-organ failure.
The WHO has published detailed guidelines for clinical management of patients with COVID-19.
For mild COVID-19 cases, patients can be provided with antipyretics for fever.
The management of severe COVID-19 cases includes immediate oxygen therapy and monitoring, it may be necessary to proactively prevent complications and secondary infections, treat underlying diseases and provide organ function support., Treatment of co-infections relies on empirical antimicrobial therapy to treat all likely pathogens causing severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) and sepsis (Figure 1).
Patients suspected to have COVID-19 should be administered appropriate empirical antimicrobials within 1 h of identification of sepsis.
Administration of antimicrobials in different hospital situations during the COVID-19 pandemic and the implications for AMR in One Health sectors.
There is no current evidence to recommend any specific treatment for patients with confirmed COVID-19.
While a variety of antiviral agents, including antiviral peptides (e.g. favipiravir) and corticosteroids have been used in COVID-19 patients, their role and mode of action has yet to be established., Dexamethasone, a corticosteroid, has shown benefits in critically ill patients with COVID-19, reducing the mortality by about one-fifth or one-third in patients requiring oxygen or ventilator support, respectively.
The antiviral agent remdesivir is the most promising treatment for COVID-19, as it inhibits the activity of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.,
Information on antimicrobial treatments given to patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection is scarce.
For example, Chen et al. reported that 15% of COVID-19 patients received antifungal treatment and 71% received antibiotic treatment, 25% of whom were treated with a single antibiotic and 45% with combination therapy.
The administration of antibiotics was also reported in a case of a neonate with non-specific symptoms of COVID-19 infection; this neonate received fluid therapy, oxygen therapy and antibiotic therapy with vancomycin and amikacin.
Other studies did not describe the antimicrobial types used, reporting only the administration of IV antibiotic and antifungal medications in 57% and 3% of COVID-19 patients, respectively, or that all of 41 patients (100%) received antibiotics and 93% received antiviral treatments.
Other antibiotic therapeutics proposed for the treatment of COVID-19 disease are azithromycin, quercetin, rapamycin and doxycycline.
However, the combination of hydroxychloroquine (an analogue of chloroquine considered an old antimalarial drug) and azithromycin appeared to be even more effective in COVID-19 treatment.
The COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to become a sustained major public health emergency.
In the COVID-19 pandemic, it is important to warn of the unreported amounts of antibiotics and antifungals that have been administered worldwide in just a few months.
Rawson et al. highlighted several factors and potential impacts during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as potential interventions in the AMR area.
Regardless of the COVID-19 pandemic, AMR could force up to 24 million people into extreme poverty by 2030 and drug-resistant diseases could cause 10 million deaths each year by 2050, as described in a United Nations report for urgent action to avert the AMR crisis., A sustained One Health approach is essential to engage and unite all stakeholders around a shared vision and common goals, since this global crisis includes humans, animals, plants, food and the environment and knows no borders (Figure 1).
Multisectoral and multifaceted actions on AMR are crucial because human medicine, and the food and agricultural sectors use antibiotics daily.,
Abstract  COVID-19 is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which has infected more than 4 million people with 278 892 deaths worldwide as of 11 May 2020.
This article highlights the administration of antimicrobials in COVID-19 patients worldwide, during the 2019–20 pandemic.