A novel coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2 leading to COVID‐19 was identified for the first time in December 2019 and as of today has infected already more than 5.0 million and killed more than 320 000 people worldwide (as of 20th of May 2020).
An anti‐CD147 antibody that blocks infection with SARS‐CoV‐2 in vitro and its humanized drug (meplazumab) has been already used in a clinical trial in patients with COVID‐19 pneumonia.
The percentage of improvement in patients with severe and critical COVID‐19 presentations seemed higher in weekly meplazumab treatment compared to patients on the conventional treatment.
They can be incorporated to the viral capsid and released, which further enables virus binding to CD147 and subsequent infection of CD147‐expressing cells.
Since cyclophilins are regulators of NFAT activation, the extracellular binding of the virus through cyclophilin‐CD147 complex, as well as intracellular interactions of cyclophilins with the virus proteins might be important in COVID‐19 development.
We analyzed gene expression of SARS‐CoV‐2 receptors and related molecules’ (Table S1) in a broad range of tissues and immune cells from the human RNA‐seq databases generated by our ex vivo and in vitro approaches in the Swiss Institute of Asthma and Allergy Research (SIAF), by our collaborators or from the Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).
We further investigated different expression patterns of ACE2‐, CD147‐, and CD26‐related genes in the context of potential COVID‐19 risk factors, namely age, gender, smoking status, diagnosis of asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), hypertension, obesity, and atopic dermatitis (AD) (Table S3).
Genes of interest were extracted from all datasets.
Clinical evidence from COVID‐19 patients worldwide clearly demonstrates an association between disease severity and morbidity with age.
We analyzed expression of ACE2‐, CD147‐, and CD26‐related genes from different cells and tissues in various comorbidities and risk factors, which have been shown, or are suspected to predispose to SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and/or COVID‐19 progression.
Next, we analyzed the ACE2‐, CD147‐, and CD26‐related gene expression in our controls, asthma and COPD patients according to the additional clinical features, which have been reported as risk factors for COVID‐19, such as hypertension, smoking, gender, and obesity.
,
In summary, these findings suggest that higher BMI and older age lead to higher expression of CD147‐related genes on immune cells, but not on the barrier cells, which potentially can influence the development and the course of COVID‐19.
As we found a high expression of ACE2‐, CD147‐, and CD26‐related genes in the skin biopsies of healthy subjects, and since COVID‐19‐related skin lesions have been recently reported,
 we also analyzed the skin biopsies of healthy subjects and AD patients.
COVID‐19 pandemic is developing at such a pace that extraordinary actions are being initiated to learn quickly about its biology, transmission, and potential means of prevention and treatment.
In this spirit, we first performed an extensive literature and database search and curated a list of proven and potential receptors for SARS‐CoV‐2 and interaction partners, whose expression in different tissues and cells might be involved in the course of immunological response in COVID‐19 (Figure 6).
While interesting associations were observed to be age‐dependent, these findings must be further explored and repeated due to the possibility of batch‐specific systematic variations in the gene expression values between in‐house and public datasets.
Despite our efforts in applying identical data analysis workflow for the datasets produced by our group and those available in public repositories, different sequencing facilities and experiment protocols can lead to altered gene expression values, especially for genes with extreme gene length and G/C content.
Finally, we analyzed gene expression in adults with known and potential COVID‐19 comorbidities and risk factors such as COPD, asthma, hypertension, obesity, smoking, male gender, and AD.
Interestingly, we observed high expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in bronchial airway epithelium: in HBECs ALI cultures in vitro, as well as in vivo in humans in bronchial biopsies, indicating that they can be as important in initiation and progression of COVID‐19, as recently shown for type II pneumocytes.
On the other hand, ACE2 and the angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2) were reported to protect from severe acute lung injury in mice,
 therefore an importance of ACE2 in SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and COVID‐19 progression should be further explored.
Even though initially asthma was not reported to be a significant comorbidity for COVID‐19, more observations from Europe and the US seem to show otherwise.
Thus, it is possible that ACE2 expression in the airways of allergic patients, even if slightly protective in terms of infection with SARS‐CoV‐2, might also predispose to faster progression of COVID‐19 to more severe forms, especially in case of higher TMPRSS2 expression.
We found that immune cells do not express ACE2, TMPRSS2, or SLC6A19, which has also been observed by others.
, 
 Importantly though, we found that CD147 and its extracellular agonists and transmembrane partners are highly expressed in innate and adaptive immune cells in the lungs and in the periphery, suggesting that they should be further investigated in SARS‐CoV‐2 spread and COVID‐19 pathology.
Obesity is one of the main comorbidities reported in patients with severe COVID‐19,
 and since CD147 expression in the whole blood correlates positively with BMI in our cohort, it certainly needs further attention in relation to COVID‐19.
Importantly, CD147 expression is upregulated by high glucose concentrations,
 which might reflect its correlation with obesity, and potentially also with diabetes, another very important COVID‐19 comorbidity.
Thus, our results suggest a possible role of CD147 and its extracellular and intracellular ligands in COVID‐19 pathogenesis via regulation of cell metabolism, motility, and activation, especially in patients with comorbidities.
A clinical trial with anti‐CD147 in COVID‐19 patients seems to confirm its pleiotropic role in SARS‐CoV‐2 infection, but it requires further research to investigate the involved mechanisms and molecules.
Recent studies reported that many COVID‐19 cases developed nonpruritic, erythematous rashes, urticaria, or varicella‐like lesions,
, 
 but so far it is not known if they are a place of viral replication or just a local reaction to systemic infection.
Similarly, not much is yet known about the potential connections between AD and the course of COVID‐19.
Abstract   Background  Morbidity and mortality from COVID‐19 caused by novel coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2 is accelerating worldwide, and novel clinical presentations of COVID‐19 are often reported.
The aim of our study was to analyze the expression of known and potential SARS‐CoV‐2 receptors and related molecules in the extensive collection of primary human cells and tissues from healthy subjects of different age and from patients with risk factors and known comorbidities of COVID‐19.
We performed RNA sequencing and explored available RNA‐Seq databases to study gene expression and co‐expression of ACE2, CD147 ( BSG ), and CD26 ( DPP4 ) and their direct and indirect molecular partners in primary human bronchial epithelial cells, bronchial and skin biopsies, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, whole blood, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), monocytes, neutrophils, DCs, NK cells, ILC1, ILC2, ILC3, CD4 + and CD8 +
We analyzed the material from healthy children and adults, and from adults in relation to their disease or COVID‐19 risk factor status.
Altered expression of these receptors related to age, gender, obesity and smoking, as well as with the disease status, might contribute to COVID‐19 morbidity and severity patterns.