Probably started in December 2019 from a zoonotic transmission from traded wild animals in a Wuhan market (Hubei Province, China) [1,2], the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) quickly reached a planetary dimension forcing billions of people into lockdown, grinding to a halt most of the world economies, and killing in excess of 375,000 of the 6.1 million people known to be infected (as of 2 June 2020).
Initially catalogued as a respiratory disease (severe acute respiratory syndrome, SARS), the investigation of severe COVID-19 cases progressively revealed their association with a dysfunctional pro-inflammatory response leading to severe lung damages [3], but also cardiovascular complications [4] and multi-organ failures [5].
The unexpected severity and dimension of the COVID-19 pandemic prompted national research organizations to ask their scientists, even without prior knowledge on coronaviruses, to use their expertise to contribute to the solution of this formidable challenge.
In this paper, I present a bioinformatic investigation of publicly available sequence data, in an attempt to identify which molecular processes might be responsible of the specific clinical picture of COVID-19.
Several coincidental findings examined in the light of the rich pre-existing bibliographical information strongly suggest that virus-induced de-mono-ADP-ribosylation (de-MARylation) of STAT1 might be one of the key steps leading to the inflammatory cytokine storm seen in the most severe COVID-19 cases.
Due to the lockdown constraints imposed during the COVID-19 epidemic, all the bioinformatics analyses presented in this article were performed on publicly accessible bioinformatic platforms.
As previously noticed, the most similar isolate is bat coronavirus RaTG13 with 96.7% similarity (Accession # QHR63299) [1], followed by two other bat isolates (# AVP78030, # AVP78041, 93.5% and 92.5% identical, respectively) [9], and several similar pangolin isolates (e.g., # QIQ54046, 85.4% identical) (Cao et al., unpublished).
It turns out that this protein plays a significant role in the regulation of the inflammatory response that is out of control in severe cases of COVID-19.
By following the natural incentive of all viruses to maximize their infectivity, hereby increasing the density of its receptor, SARS-CoV-2 triggers a cytokine storm as an unfortunate side-effect of COVID-19.
As more cases of COVID-19 are studied and treated worldwide, it had become apparent that the lethal and most severe cases of pneumonia are due to an out-of-control inflammatory response to the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
A number of convergent findings suggest de-mono-ADP-ribosylation (de-MARylation) of STAT1 by the SARS-CoV-2 nsp3 as a putative cause of the cytokine storm observed in the most severe cases of COVID-19.