The severe respiratory disease COVID-19 was first noticed in late December 2019 ().
At the beginning of May, COVID-19 had spread to ~150 countries and infected more than 3.3 million people ().
The etiological agent of COVID-19 (), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (), was identified as a new member of the genus Betacoronavirus, which includes a diverse reservoir of coronaviruses (CoVs) isolated from bats (–).
While hundreds of new SARS-CoV-2 sequences are added to the GISAID (Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data) repertoire every day (), we note that the RBM region currently remains highly conserved.
No amino acid within 6 Å of the ACE2 binding site has repeated variations, with the exception of G476S, a very rare mutation found in eight sequences from a local cluster in the Washington state, out of 6400 total sequences from GISAID (13 April 2020).
An analysis of 6400 SARS-CoV-2 sequences from GISAID (, ) identifies only one very rare mutation, G476S that is a direct ACE2 contact residue.
All 43 CoV complete genome sequences were obtained from GenBank and GISAID (, ) and were selected to be representative of the diversity (tables S2 and S3).
Pan_SL-CoV_GD/P1La sequence was generated by combining Pan_SL-CoV_GD/P1L () with some additional sequences from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) BioProject database PRJNA5732983 (, ) to have a maximal coverage of the complete genome sequence for analysis.
Recombination regions and breakpoints were also analyzed using the LANL (Los Alamos National Laboratory) database () tool RIP () with a 400-bp window.
Cumulative plots of the average behavior of each codon for all pairwise comparisons in the input data, for insertions and deletions (indels), synonymous (syn), and nonsynonymous (nonsyn) mutations and values of the ratios of the rate of synonymous nucleotide substitutions per synonymous site and nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site (dN/dS or ω), were obtained using the LANL database tool SNAP ().
COVID-19 has become a global pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.