The transmission and progression of this disease (COVID-19) imply that a great number of infected individuals will need hospitalization and possibly admission to intensive care units [2, 3].
On May 11, over 168,000 individuals in Brazil had a confirmed COVID-19 infection and around 11,500 had died from the disease.
The management of early breast cancer (EBC), a disease with well-established treatment protocols [6–8], also had to be adjusted in order to free up hospital beds and vital hospital supplies for individuals infected by COVID-19.
This online survey aimed to evaluate how Brazilian breast specialists have managed EBC (stage I/II and clinically negative axilla) following publication of emergency treatment protocols [12–14, 23, 24], at the beginning and during the COVID-19 pandemic, according to EBC subtypes [26] and oncoplastic surgery.
The results were stratified by degree of priority in accordance with the COVID-19 Pandemic Breast Cancer Consortium: Priority A patients have a condition that is immediately life threatening and for whom a delay would alter prognosis, while Priority B patients are those who do not have an immediately life threatening condition, but for whom treatment should not be delayed until the end of the pandemic, and Priority C patients are those for whom treatment could be deferred [13].
However, there is no statistically significant difference when the southeastern and northeastern regions, those most affected by COVID-19 in Brazil, are evaluated together (p = 0.746) (Table 1).
Overall, 498 respondents (99%) lived/worked in a city/town with confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 258 (51.3%) reported that there were COVID-free medical establishments in their cities.
Being board-certified, having COVID-free hospitals available and working in an academic institute associated with cancer treatment had no significant effect either at the beginning or during the pandemic (Table 2).
The availability of hospital supplies and beds is greater in the southeast of the country where the concentration of COVID-19 cases is greater.
In agreement with the SBM database, most respondents live in state capitals or in cities with more than 500,000 inhabitants, which are also those most affected by COVID-19 [34].
The onset of the COVID-19 epidemic in Brazil occurred relatively late compared to Europe and North America.
The demographic characteristics most associated with a change in management at the beginning of the pandemic were living in the southeast of the country and in a state capital city, coinciding with the areas in which the incidence of COVID-19 infection was greatest, with an increasing demand for hospital beds and the implementation of restrictive measures by the government.
On the other hand, during the pandemic, various state capital cities made an effort to reserve COVID-free hospitals or wards so as to guarantee the admission of elective patients, particularly cancer patients.
According to the advice provided in the Ontario Health Pandemic Planning Clinical Guideline for Patients with Cancer [37], cases of luminal tumors were classified as Priority B, while the COVID-19 Pandemic Breast Cancer Consortium stratified such tumors as Priority B3 (T2 or N1) or C1 (T1N0) [13].
Indeed, 67% of respondents considered that chemotherapy increases the risk of developing COVID-19-related complications.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted early breast cancer (EBC) treatment worldwide.