Caused by SARS-CoV-2, this disease was named as COVID-19 by the World Health Organization (WHO) and quickly spreads all over the world [8].
The COVID-19 outbreak was declared an epidemic by the World Health Organization after causing the death of tens of thousands of people [9].
The COVID-19 epidemic is continuing to be a major problem for the whole world [8], [11].
As COVID-19, the largest epidemic of modern times turned into a pandemic, an urgent search was started throughout the world for a therapeutic drug against COVID-19 to control the epidemic and decrease the high mortality rates.
In COVID-19, the reason why the disease was very mild in some people and very severe in others is thought to be related to the amount of retinol previously stored in the patient's liver.
In COVID-19, the falling levels of retinoic acids, which are rapidly depleted in the body, and the resulting excessive cytokine release syndrome, are responsible for most of the disease, severe clinical and symptoms.
Two separate clinical studies from Egypt reported to the US NIH clinical trials are underway to determine the effectiveness of Isotretinoin, a retinoic acid derivative, in COVID-19 [22].
The clinical picture, which is common in severe COVID-19 patients and is referred to as “pink eye” [23], [24], is nothing more than conjunctivitis seen in severe vitamin A deficiency.
Although attempts are made to explain the taste and olfactory disorders in COVID-19 patients with ACE2 receptors it is clear that it takes place through retinoic acid receptors [25].
This also suggest that vitamin A deficiency also develops in COVID-19.
The findings and symptoms that arise in the nervous system and eyes of COVID-19 patients are nothing but the results of retinoic acid deficiency manifested through retinoid acid receptors.
Dizziness, headache, impaired consciousness, acute cerebrovascular disorder, ataxia and epilepsy are observed in COVID-19 patients as central nervous system involvement and hypogeusia, hyposmia, hypopsia and neuralgia are observed as peripheral nervous system involvement.
Acute hemorrhagic necrotizing encephalopathy cases related to COVID-19 were also reported.
The first Guillain-Barré syndrome that could be related to COVID-19 was reported by Zhao et al [28].
It could be considered that the reason for observing autoimmune diseases such as Kawasaki in COVID-19 is related to this mechanism.
The first Guillain-Barré syndrome that could be related to COVID-19 was reported by Zhao et al [28].
This may increase the tendency to thrombosis in addition to hypoxia and endothelial damage in COVID-19.
In some COVID-19 patients, the cause of inadequate antibody response may be due to retinol depletion.
Vitamin A deficiency increases mortality in AIDS.
Vitamin A replacement also provides benefit for other infections in AIDS.
A deficiency increases mortality in AIDS [56].
The frequency of Measles, Chicken Pox, RSV, AIDS and pneumonia increase in vitamin A deficiency [57].
All the drugs bound to a certain protocol by the COVID-19 Science and Advisory Board in our country, as in many countries throughout the world, and used in COVID-19 treatment, inhibit the cytochrome P450 system (Table 1
).
The table below shows the drugs included in the COVID-19 treatment protocol and their stimulation / inhibition status on the CYP P450 system.
The study conducted in China found this drug to be unsuccessful against COVID-19 [36].
In this respect, the use of alcohol has a negative impact on COVID-19 prognosis.
French people were consuming high amounts of red wine on the first days of the COVID-19 pandemic.
It was stated that red wine (not white wine) consumption protected people from COVID-19 and that it was even good for the patients.
The reason why COVID-19 progresses more in males than females (ignoring smoking) is that the cytochrome oxidase system is less inhibited in males than females.
In this case, all drugs and compounds that inhibit the liver cytochrome P450 oxidase system may be effective against COVID-19 by preventing retinoic acid metabolism.
In fact, it is not difficult to predict that even Ketoconazole, which is used as an antifungal, can have significant efficacy in COVID-19 treatment as a strong cytochrome oxidase P450 inhibitor (if sufficient retinoic acid is available in the body) [30].
Retinoic acids, zinc and RAMBAs may work against COVID-19, which continues with full intensity.
COVID-19 and previously defined sepsis, SIRS and ARDS are each retinoic acid depletion syndrome.
We claim that retinoic acid metabolism is defective in most inflammatory diseases, particularly COVID-19 (cytokine storm) sepsis, SIRS and ARDS.