The novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is a pandemic that has infected more than 3.2 million people around the world and caused more than 250,000 deaths as of May 4, 2020 (), including >1.2 million cases in the United States (US) and >52,000 in California.
In particular, Washington State has reported a series of COVID-19 cases from Jan 21 to Mar 18, following the identification of the earliest case reported in the US, WA1, on Jan 19, suggesting the presence of a persistent transmission chain in the community (, ).
However, real-time genomic epidemiology data of COVID-19 to inform public health interventions in California have been lacking to date.
Here we used this method and/or tiling multiplex PCR to recover viral genomes from COVID-19 patients in Northern California and perform phylogenetic analyses to better understand the genetic diversity of SARS-CoV-2 in the US and the nature of transmission of virus lineages in the community.
We screened a total of 62 respiratory swab samples from 54 COVID-19 patients available from hospitals and clinics at University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), the California Department of Public Health (CDPH), and 8 county public health departments in Northern California (table S1).
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the 36 SARS-CoV-2 genomes from California generated in this study were dispersed across the evolutionary tree of SARS-CoV-2 that was built from 789 worldwide genomes deposited into GISAID as of March 20, 2020 (Fig. 2A).
This suggested that the virus from UC19 could be basally positioned relative to the cruise ship strains from voyage B, and that COVID-19 infections associated with voyage A may have been passed onto passengers and crew on voyage B.
Three patients examined in this study (CA3, CA4, and UC12) had COVID-19 infections associated with international travel or exposure to international travelers.
In Santa Clara County, we sequenced 7 genomes from individuals who were part of a local outbreak of COVID-19 at a large workplace facility with multiple employers, large areas of shared space, and heavy pedestrian traffic.
The genomic epidemiology of the COVID-19 cases associated with community spread studied here do not show any predominant SARS-CoV-2 lineage circulating in Northern California.
In addition, WA1 lineage viruses have been identified in COVID-19 cases from many states including Minnesota, Connecticut, Utah, Virginia, and New York (, ).
Undersampling of virus genomes is due in part to the high proportion of cases (80%) with asymptomatic or mild disease (–) and limited diagnostic testing for COVID-19 infection to date in California and throughout the US.
Despite this, our study shows that robust insights into COVID-19 transmission are achievable if virus genomic diversity is combined and jointly interpreted with detailed epidemiological case data.
Our data suggest concerning trends in this direction, such as the association between the WA1 lineage and community-acquired COVID-19 cases in several counties of Northern California, and a virus from the SCC1 lineage detected in residents of neighboring San Mateo and Solano County.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has spread globally, with >52,000 cases in California as of May 4, 2020.