The entire world is currently under the big threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS CoV2) virus.
Epidemiological surveys show that diabetic patients are at high risk to contract COVID-19 infection [1].
More importantly, they are also the major victims of COVID-19 associated mortalities.
In a study done by the COVID-19 surveillance group of Italy on 3200 patients, 34% of 481 nonsurvivors had diabetes [3].
Similarly, reports from the Centers for Diabetes Control and Prevention, United States show that 11% of COVID-19 patients have diabetes [5].
The most populated country like India, more than 70% of COVID-19-associated mortalities are due to comorbidities including diabetes, hypertension, CVD, and pulmonary problems.
The diabetic population has crossed 120 million worldwide in 2019 and this in turn poses an increased threat for further COVID-19 infection and related mortalities in these patients in upcoming days.
Hence, understanding the pathobiology behind the increased mortality in COVID-19-affected diabetic patients is highly essential to develop prominent prognostic biomarkers and accurate therapies that save their lives.
Furin cleaves this S1/S2 site and allows viral entry into host cells which in turn leads to the onset of COVID-19 infection in humans (Fig. 1) [9].
This in turn broadens the cell tropism of the SARS CoV2 virus and may probably be the reason behind the multiple organ damages observed in COVID-19 patients.
This is proven by the fact that organs severely affected by SARS CoV2 infection in COVID-19 patients including lungs, liver, kidney express high levels of furin.
Hence, furin overexpression in diabetes patients may be the key reason behind their increased risk to contract COVID-19 infection.
Blood clots are other major fatal complications that cause increased mortalities in COVID-19 patients [13].
Hence, furin might also be associated with COVID-19-related mortalities that occur due to blood clots.
This in turn might increase the susceptibility of diabetes patients to contract COVID-19 infection.
Hence, it is highly plausible that furin might be the major risk factor for the increased mortality of COVID-19 infected diabetes patients.
Detailed investigations on the correlation between plasma furin levels, viral load, and severity of fatal complications in COVID-19-infected diabetes patients are very much needed to decipher the link between furin and prognosis status in these patients.
These findings will aid in determining if plasma furin could act as a prominent prognostic biomarker in COVID-19 patients.
Also, it will provide clues for the utilization of furin inhibitors to save the lives of COVID-19-infected diabetes patients.