As of 19 May 2020, the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 that causes the severe acute respiratory syndrome COVID-19 was reported to have infected over 5 million people and killed over 320 000 people around the world [1, 2].
Large cohort studies such as the UK Biobank (UKB), which have gathered detailed epidemiological, medical and genetic records of hundreds of thousands of people, offer the opportunity to uncover risk factors for COVID-19, including the molecular genetic pathways underlying severe disease.
The cohort is a particularly appropriate focus for the study of COVID-19, because incidence of this severe disease increases with age [1, 4–10].
Emergency ICD-10 codes for COVID-19 have been assigned (U07.1 COVID-19, virus identified; U07.2 COVID-19, virus not identified; https://www.who.int/classifications/icd/COVID-19-coding-icd10.pdf).
However, there are limitations to these data for studying infection, as coding occurs in local National Health Service (NHS) Hospital Trusts, with subsequent central collation by the NHS and periodic (currently monthly) incorporation of summaries into UKB.
The Public Health England (PHE) microbiology database SGSS (Second Generation Surveillance System) offers advantages over HES data for the ascertainment of infection in UKB participants, because it provides more granular and highly specific diagnosis of microbiological confirmed infection, including both COVID-19 and infections caused by micro-organisms with antimicrobial resistance (AMR).
Of note, it only allows identification of microbiologically confirmed disease; in the case of COVID-19, other databases with a more clinical focus also exist, such as the PHE COVID-19 Hospitalization in England Surveillance System (CHESS) and Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC) databases containing individual patient data on critically ill patients in intensive care units.
The SGSS database provides coverage of English UKB participants, who make up 89 % of the cohort based on residence at the time of recruitment.
There are specific challenges that arise when frequently linking data between the large SGSS and UKB participant databases.
(2) Periodically, the agent updates a database held at PHE Colindale with any new records from SGSS that it matches with UKB participants.
We have tested this system by collecting bacteriology samples in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, prior to proposed England-wide deployment, although it could also be applied to COVID-19 samples.
The number of new cases of COVID-19 inpatients recorded in SGSS has increased rapidly since early 2020, with close correspondence between the growth in cases among UKB participants and England as a whole (Fig. 4).
Thus, UKB participants made up 0.9 % of all COVID-19 inpatients in SGSS.
We estimated per capita incidence of our operational definition of severe COVID-19 for the period 16 March – 14 May 2020 using SGSS data, not restricted to UKB participants (Fig. 5a).
In keeping with other reports (see Introduction), males over 50 were generally at elevated risk of developing severe COVID-19 across England (odds ratio 1.41, 95 % CI 1.39–1.43; Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test stratified by age group), relative to females over 50.
Taking these differences into account using the age and sex distribution of the English UKB cohort in early 2020 and the Office for National Statistics estimates of the English population from mid-2018 (https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/datasets/populationestimatesforukenglandandwalesscotlandandnorthernireland), we compared disease incidence in UKB versus the general population.
Even taking into account this difference, the relative incidence of severe COVID-19 by age and sex was not identical between non-UKB inpatients and UKB inpatients (P=0.005 females, P=0.0005 males, chi-square goodness-of-fit tests; Fig. 5b, c).
In conclusion, incidence of severe COVID-19 by age and sex is similar but not identical between the English UKB cohort and the rest of the population, with 27.4 % fewer positive inpatients than expected.
We investigated the robustness of our method of identifying hospital inpatients, on which we base the definition of severe COVID-19.
Fig. 6 indicates that the alternative definition (grey bars) may be more specific, because the odds ratios of severe COVID-19 were larger (further from 1) than under the proposed definition.
We conclude that greater sensitivity of the proposed definition (green bars) trades off some specificity compared to a more stringent alternative and, therefore, modestly dilutes the magnitude of age- and sex-specific differences in severe COVID-19 incidence.
Our calculations do not take into consideration boosts in power that can be achieved by various means, including pooling the effects of multiple variants within or between genes using analyses of various kinds [17] or meta-analysis of the sort planned by the COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative (www.covid19hg.org), which aims to combine signals across multiple cohorts.
Public Health England’s Second Generation Surveillance System is a centralized microbiology database covering English clinical diagnostics laboratories that provides national surveillance of legally notifiable infections, bacterial isolations and antimicrobial resistance.
In this study, we implemented rapid dynamic linkage, which allows us to provide a regular feed of new COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) test results to UKB to facilitate rapid and urgent research into the epidemiological and human genetic risk factors for severe infection in the cohort.
Here, we have characterized the first 1352 cases of COVID-19 in UKB participants, of whom 895 met our working definition of severe COVID-19 as inpatients hospitalized on or after 16 March 2020.
We found that the incidence of severe COVID-19 among UKB cases was 27.4 % lower than the general population in England, although this difference varied significantly by age and sex.