The pandemic of COVID-19, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has posed a serious threat to global public health, calling for the development of reliable diagnostic tests, able to identify (and possibly quantify) SARS-CoV-2.
The persistently negative rtPCR results in patients with clinical suspects of COVID-19, and no alternative diagnosis, could be related to the lower viral titers that characterize the most widely used nasopharyngeal samples [7] in comparison to other respiratory specimens, such as sputum [8], as well as to the replication kinetics of the virus.
Standing the necessity of a limitation (as much as possible) of false negative results in COVID-19 diagnosis, the use of ddPCR could provide a critical support [8].
All patients were symptomatic with exception of one (COVID-19 contact) and thus immediately hospitalized and tested for SARS-CoV-2 rtPCR, whose result was negative.
Of note, a severe COVID-19 manifestation characterized 14 of the 19 patients with a ddPCR confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (73.7%, S1 Table).
The SARS-CoV-2 RNA positivity in the 5 samples with a serological assay not available (ID 1, 4, 8, 12, 13) was further confirmed by using a second assay adapted for ddPCR and targeting two different portions of RdRp [17].
SARS-CoV-2 was detected at later time points also by standard qualitative rtPCR for three of these five patients (ID 1, 4, 8, S1 Table).
By using this reliable, reproducible and highly sensitive assay, we could improve the efficiency of COVID-19 diagnosis on nasopharyngeal swabs even at a very early stage of viral replication, or in anatomical districts where the virus is present at lower levels, such as the oropharyngeal or the nasopharyngeal samples [8, 9].
In the context of COVID-19 diagnosis, two recent studies highlight the best performances of ddPCR in detecting low viral load samples [19,20].
In particular, without this assay, no molecular laboratory confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 would have been available at hospitalization for 12 patients, all characterized by a severe COVID-19 manifestation and with evidence of bilateral interstitial pneumonia, and for two patients affected by pneumonia with pleuritis (n = 1), and lung cancer (n = 1), for whom the mere clinical evaluation excluded the COVID-19.
Since SARS-CoV-2-based disease (COVID-19) spreads as a pandemic, the necessity of a highly sensitive molecular diagnosis that can drastically reduce false negatives reverse transcription PCR (rtPCR) results, raises as a major clinical need.
Here we evaluated the performance of a ddPCR-based assay to quantify SARS-CoV-2 titer in 55 suspected COVID-19 cases with negative rtPCR results thanks to in-house ddPCR assay (targeting RdRp and host RNaseP).
In 15 of them (78.9%), chest CT showed a classical COVID-19 bilateral interstitial pneumonia; 14 patients (73.7%) showed severe COVID-19 manifestations.
Thanks to a ddPCR-based assay, we achieved a rapid and accurate SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis in rtPCR-negative respiratory samples of individuals with COVID-19 suspect, allowing the rapid taking care and correct management of these patients.