COVID-19 has infected over 20 million people and has killed more than 737,000 people by mid August 2020.
There are currently no promising antiviral drugs or vaccines to combat COVID-19.
Developing functional computational models and networks to predict potential SARS-CoV -miRNA/lncRNA association may benefit not only the understanding of COVID-19 mechanism at the noncoding RNA level, but also the detection of disease biomarkers for disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, and prevention.
Since it is also important to consider the virus-host protein-protein interaction in order to understand its pathogenesis during infection [7,8]; we used Viruses- STRING, a protein–protein interaction database specifically designed to analyze the virus-host interactions [9].
Furthermore, we used the miRWalk2.0 database to generate a network for a comprehensive overview of miRNA-lncRNA interactions using experimentally verified data [11].
To generate an interactome network of Human SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) with human proteins, we used the STRING database http://viruses.string-db.org/ (version 10.5) [9].
In order to disclose the most possible miRNAs regulating the selected mRNAs, the MiRTarBase (http://miRTarBase.cuhk.edu.cn/), one of the most important experimentally validated miRNA-target interactions (MTIs) databases, was employed.
Further, miRNA-lncRNA interactions were determined using the miRWalk2.0 database (http://zmf.umm.uni-heidelberg.de/apps/zmf/mirwalk2/), a database on predicted and published noncoding RNAs; and seed length (SL) ≥ 13 were selected as the most significant interactions [11].
Human SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the Homo sapiens interaction network was downloaded as a vector image from the viruses STRING dataset.
Therefore, we aimed to follow a comprehensive bioinformatics approach to dissect the strongest possible changes in the noncoding RNA network in response to the viral infection in humans using the available online databases.
STRING online database as a powerful platform to explore the most significant protein-protein interactions between SARS-CoV viral particles and host proteome.
Thus, it is of utmost important priority to develop novel therapies for COVID-19.