Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a deadly disease induced by the novel coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was first discovered in China, and is accompanied by a high degree of morbidity and mortality [1].
Clinical features of COVID-19 may include pyrexia, asthenia, dyspnea, as well as acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, and coagulation dysfunction in critically ill patients [3].
However, the medical pharmacotherapy to treat COVID-19 is still insufficient [7].
Accordingly, it is necessary to explore and develop bioactive compounds to treat COVID-19.
All these pieces of evidence suggest that vitamin A may be an optional treatment for COVID-19; however, to date there has been no investigation of VA against SARS-CoV-2, especially its pharmacological mechanism.
In this report, we aimed to determine and identify the curative effect of VA for treating COVID-19 and to utilize a network pharmacology approach to uncover the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic role of VA.
We assayed and identified 393 SARS-CoV-2-associated genes from the Genecard and OMIM datasets.
These findings suggest that vitamin A could be a potential treatment for COVID-19.
However, there are few existing drug treatments for COVID-19, and some of the immunotherapy treatments and antiviral drugs used in clinical practice have shown limited therapeutic effectiveness [18].
VA may exert potent, beneficial pharmacological activity for the treatment of COVID-19 via associated cytoprotection, anti-viral and anti-inflammatory effects, and immunoregulation.
In further bioinformatics and computational assays, the therapeutic mechanisms of VA for managing COVID-19 could be conjunctively actualized through collective regulation of the FoxO signaling pathway, GnRH signaling pathway, PD-L1 expression, and PD-1 checkpoint pathway.
Adjuvant supplementation of VA may enhance the therapeutic efficacy of current clinical anti-viral agents and immunotherapy to treat potentially fatal COVID-19.
More importantly, VA may be used clinically for the treatment of COVID-19, as evidenced by the identified biological processes—which indicate pharmacological functions—and the signaling pathways, which suggest therapeutic mechanisms (Figure 6).
By using online datasets, in particular TCMSP, Drugbank, SuperPred, Swiss Target Prediction, ChemMapper, and BATMAN TCM, all target genes activated by VA were obtained.
The genes activated by VA were collected for target correction from reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and Uniprot databases.
The Genecard and OMIM datasets were employed to harvest SARS-CoV-2 genes.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), an epidemic disease characterized by rapid infection and a high death toll.
The clinical diagnosis of patients with COVID-19 has risen sharply, especially in Western countries.
Globally, an effective treatment for COVID-19 is still limited.
In this study, bioinformatics analysis and computation assays using a network pharmacology method were conducted to explore and uncover the therapeutic targets and mechanisms of VA for treating COVID-19.
Furthermore, seven core targets of VA against COVID-19, including MAPK1, IL10, EGFR, ICAM1, MAPK14, CAT , and PRKCB were identified.
With this bioinformatics-based report, we reveal, for the first time, the anti-SARS-CoV-2 functions and mechanisms of VA and suggest that VA may act as a potent treatment option for COVID-19, a deadly global epidemic.