A major lesson that the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has already taught the scientific community is that timely international data sharing and collaborative data analysis is absolutely vital to navigate through policy decisions that have life-or-death consequences.
Some of the most pressing issues about COVID-19 infections require urgent sharing of high-quality data concerning, for example, risk factors that influence infection, prognosis, and predictions of drug response from phenotypic, genotypic, and epigenetic data.
To generate or test scientific hypotheses, we need large-scale and well-characterized patient-level datasets to provide sufficient statistical power.
Building and sharing massive datasets containing personal health information have numerous legal and ethical implications that hinder new discoveries and prevent the scientific community from assessing their validity.
In this respect, the case of 2 COVID-19 related articles published by The Lancet and The New England Journal of Medicine serves as an example.
These instances reinforce the need for a robust privacy- and confidentiality-compliant data-processing and sharing system to address these challenges in the era of COVID-19 and future pandemics.
Numerous data-driven projects have been launched across the globe to combat COVID-19, as summarized below.
On the 1 hand, several data-sharing projects on COVID-19 are based on a decentralized approach, employing the computation of local statistics (sometimes obfuscated to hide small numbers) that are subsequently shared and aggregated through meta-analysis.
On the other hand, other projects aim to centralize patient-level data from COVID-19 at a single site and then perform the analysis.
With this goal in mind, we have established an international consortium for Secure Collective Research (SCOR) to deploy the next-generation distributed infrastructure and tools for secure data sharing, analysis, and mining while respecting patient privacy and maximizing data utility during global disease outbreaks like the current COVID-19 pandemic.
SCOR is a new initiative that complements existing multicentric data-sharing efforts to face the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 research moves rapidly with new initiatives announced daily.
In Table 1 we summarize the major initiatives we are aware of (as of June 2020) and compare them to SCOR along the following axes:
Comparison of fully automated systems for COVID-19 data sharing is reported in Table 2 below.
This issue is alleviated when safe settings are used to create large (protected) virtual datasets compared to applying data obfuscation to local datasets.
By using MedCo, health professionals and scientists can query data scattered among diverse institutions as if it were stored in a single location (virtual collective dataset) but without the need of seeing nor moving the data (see Figure 2).
Existing health informatics systems do not incorporate the latest progress in modern security and federated machine learning algorithms, which are poised to offer solutions.