Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of COVID-19, a major pandemic that threatens millions of lives and the global economy (1).
It is also crucial for protecting populations of wildlife species in native habitats and under human care, particularly nonhuman primates, which may be susceptible to COVID-19 (10).
We drew on the rapidly growing database of annotated vertebrate genomes, including new genomes produced by the Genomes 10K-affiliated Bat1K Consortium, Zoonomia, and Vertebrate Genomes Project, and other sources (30, 31).
Nonetheless, our predictions provide a useful starting point for the selection of appropriate animal models for COVID-19 research and identification of species that may be at risk for human-to-animal or animal-to-animal transmissions of SARS-CoV-2.
Of the 19 catarrhine primates analyzed, 18/19 scored very high for binding of their ACE2 to SARS-CoV-2 S and one scored high (the Angola colobus); the 18 species scoring very high had 25/25 binding residues identical to human ACE2, including rhesus macaques, which are known to be infected by SARS-CoV-2 and develop COVID-19-like clinical symptoms (3, 43).
Chiroptera represents a clade of mammals that are of high interest in COVID-19 research because several bat species are known to harbor coronaviruses, including those most closely related to SARS-CoV-2 (1).
Presently, there is a tremendous need for animal models to study SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis, as the only species currently known to be infected and show similar symptoms of COVID-19 is rhesus macaque.
The sources and accession numbers for the genomes or proteins retrieved from NCBI are listed in Dataset S1.
The novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of COVID-19, a major pandemic that threatens millions of human lives and the global economy.
This can assist the identification of intermediate hosts for SARS-CoV-2 and hence reduce the opportunity for a future outbreak of COVID-19.
The novel coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of COVID-19.
Here, we utilized a unique dataset of ACE2 sequences from 410 vertebrate species, including 252 mammals, to study the conservation of ACE2 and its potential to be used as a receptor by SARS-CoV-2.
Our results, if confirmed by additional experimental data, may lead to the identification of intermediate host species for SARS-CoV-2, guide the selection of animal models of COVID-19, and assist the conservation of animals both in native habitats and in human care.