Managing the immediate demands of the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic has tested many healthcare systems across the world, to their limits.
In the months since the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in December 2019, worldwide there have been more than 7.5 millions cases of infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-Cov-2) reported.
The treatment needs of COVID-19 survivors are not yet fully appreciated.
It incorporates the cognitive, physical, and psychological dysfunction reported after ICU discharge that can have profound effects on quality of life.
It is likely that those surviving critical illness with COVID-19 will be at particular risk of developing chronic pain.
Owing to the severity of COVID-19 critical illness, it is likely that survivors will have undergone multiple pain-associated interventions.
COVID-19 survivors are likely to have sustained a prolonged period of immobilisation, sedation, and ventilation, putting them at high risk of associated ICU-acquired weakness (ICUAW).
Neuromuscular block is now highlighted in several guideline publications as a strategy to improve ventilation in those with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) associated with COVID-19
,
; although there is no consensus, some recommendations also include use of corticosteroids in certain populations.
The prevalence of ICUAW in the general ARDS population is estimated at 25–96%, and although reported after the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) epidemic it is yet to be determined in those critically ill with COVID-19.
A mainstay of respiratory support through the COVID-19 pandemic has been use of repeated patient proning to improve ventilation.
Reports of neurological sequelae of COVID-19 infection are emerging, indicating both central and peripheral nervous system involvement; symptoms such as confusion, headache and dizziness, and anosmia, ageusia, and nerve pain are now described in retrospective cohorts and case reports.
It is now clear that COVID-19 itself is associated with painful symptoms, including myalgia, arthralgia, abdominal pain, headache, and chest pain, and even those not admitted to critical care environments may have pain requiring opioids for symptom management.
An important area to recognise is the psychological impact of COVID-19, with the unique social restrictions likely to create an additional burden.
In COVID-19 this may be augmented by separation from personal protective equipment (PPE) adding to the already alien environment, breakdown of social networks, and fear of mortality; this increases the potential for development of PTSD, anxiety, and depression, as observed in the SARS outbreak.
Even baseline patient characteristics, identified as factors associated with the development of severe COVID-19, overlap with those associated with chronic pain after critical illness, including multi-morbidity and increasing age.
Emerging reports from Wuhan, which is now operating several rehabilitation institutions for COVID-19 survivors, and Italy indicate a significant symptom burden in COVID-19 survivors including anxiety, sleep disorders, fatigue, limited exercise tolerance, and memory and executive function impairment.
There is conflicting evidence on the beneficial effects of post-ICU rehabilitation strategies in general on exercise tolerance and health-related quality of life in the pre-COVID era.
,
 Qualitative evaluation suggests increased patient satisfaction and reduced anxiety.
The make-up of such services may also need to be adjusted to address COVID-19-specific sequelae, and this may represent an opportunity to develop better links between pain and ICU survivorship programmes, and improving dialogue with other specialties such as renal, respiratory, and mental health to build existing collaborations and manage multi-morbidity.
Pain services are traditionally multidisciplinary, incorporating physical and psychological expertise with the goal of improving function and quality of life, and could therefore have a great deal to offer overwhelmed critical care services.