Early clinical descriptions of the first severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)–caused coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases at the end of 2019 rapidly highlighted distinct patterns of disease progression ().
On the basis of data from patients with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 from mainland China, admission to intensive care unit (ICU), invasive mechanical ventilation, or death occurred in 6.1% of cases (), and the death rate from recent current French data was 0.70% ().
However, little is known about the immunological features and the molecular mechanisms involved in COVID-19 severity.
We next evaluated the response of whole blood cells to IFN-α stimulation () and observed a comparable increase in ISG score upon IFN-α stimulation between groups of any severity and controls (Fig. 3H), suggesting that the potential for response to type I IFN was not affected in COVID-19 patients.
Overall, these data suggest that infected patients had no detectable circulating IFN-β and that an impaired IFN-α production characterized the most severe COVID-19 cases.
Severe COVID-19 was reported to be associated with hypercytokinaemia (, ).
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), a key player of the exacerbated inflammatory response in COVID-19 (), was not detected in peripheral blood at the transcriptional level (fig. S9B), contrasting with high amounts of IL-6 protein (Fig. 4B).
These observations are in accordance with published studies in bronchoalveolar fluids from COVID-19 patients, describing the key role of monocytes ().
In this study, we identified an impaired type I IFN response in severe and critical COVID-19 patients, accompanied by high blood viral load and an excessive NF-κB–driven inflammatory response associated with increased TNF-α and IL-6.
We observed that SARS-CoV-2 infection was characterized by an absence of circulating IFN-β in COVID-19 patients with all disease-severity grades.
In addition, most severe COVID-19 patients displayed impaired IFN-α production that was associated with lower viral clearance.
It will be important to assess in severe and critical COVID-19 patients whether this reduced type I IFN production is present at the onset of infection, whether the production is delayed, or whether IFN production is exhausted after an initial peak.
Comorbidities are risk factors for severe COVID-19 that could negatively affect IFN production and in contrast exacerbate inflammatory responses (, ).
In this respect, data from Bost et al. describe a reduced type I IFN signature in bronchoalveolar lavage macrophages from severe COVID-19 patients, supporting the validity of our analysis ().
Accordingly, IFN-λ has been proposed as a therapeutic in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and other such viral respiratory diseases (see the Perspective by Grajales-Reyes and Colonna).
Broggi et al. report that COVID-19 patient morbidity correlates with the high expression of type I and III IFNs in the lung.
Complicating this picture, Hadjadj et al. observed that peripheral blood immune cells from severe and critical COVID-19 patients have diminished type I IFN and enhanced proinflammatory interleukin-6– and tumor necrosis factor-α–fueled responses.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is characterized by distinct patterns of disease progression that suggest diverse host immune responses.
We performed an integrated immune analysis on a cohort of 50 COVID-19 patients with various disease severity.
These data suggest that type I IFN deficiency in the blood could be a hallmark of severe COVID-19 and provide a rationale for combined therapeutic approaches.