Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged late in 2019 in the Hubei province, China, as a cause of respiratory disease occasionally leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome and death (COVID-19) (1–4).
Four separate data sets of full-length (near-) complete genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 collected from the start of the pandemic to those most recently deposited on 24 April 2020 were aligned and analyzed (accession numbers listed in Table S1A in the supplemental material).
Each data set showed minimal levels of sequence divergence, with mean pairwise distances ranging from 5.5 to 9.5 nucleotide differences between each sequence.
First, the ratio of nonsynonymous (amino acid changing) to synonymous substitutions (dN/dS) was high, in the range of 0.57 to 0.73 among the different SARS-CoV-2 data sets.
This contrasts with a much lower ratio (consistently below <0.22) in sequence data sets assembled for the other human coronaviruses (Table 1).
To formally analyze the excess of C→U transitions, we calculated an index of asymmetry (frequency [f][C→U]/f[U→C]) × (fU/fC) and compared this with degrees of sequence divergence and dN/dS ratios in SARS-CoV-2 and other coronavirus data sets (Fig. 2B and C).
This comparison showed that the excess of C→U substitutions was most marked among very recently diverged sequences associated with the SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV outbreaks and was reduced significantly in sequence data sets of the more divergent human coronaviruses (NL63, OC43, 229E, and OC43) as sequences accumulated substitutions.
These showed mean levels of within-group sequence divergence of 0.1%, 1.1%, and 0.5%, respectively, spanning the range of divergences in the analyzed SARS-CoV-2 and other coronavirus data sets.
Long bars representing more polymorphic sites were frequently shared between replicate data sets, but unique substitutions (occurring once in the data set [short bars]) showed largely separate distributions.
Substitutions were not focused toward any particular gene or intergenic region, although all three data sets showed marginally higher frequencies of substitutions in the N gene.
A selection of sequences showing C→U changes in different genome regions was plotted in a phylogenetic tree containing sequences from the SARS-CoV-2 data set (Fig. 4).
With the resolution possible in the tree generated from such a minimally divergent data set, many sequences with shared C→U changes were not monophyletic (e.g., those with substitutions at positions 5784, 10319, 21575, 28657, and 28887).
On analysis of amino acid sequence changes, a remarkable 52% of nonsynonymous transitions in the SARS-CoV-2 sequence data set were the consequence of C→U transitions (Fig. 5), compared to 26%, 10%, and 7% for G→A, U→C, and A→C transitions, respectively.
Totals of each transition in the SARS-CoV-2 sequence data set split into subtotals based on the identity of the 5′ (left) and 3′ (right) base.
Comparison of CpG frequencies of SARS-CoV-2, other coronaviruses, and a set of other mammalian RNA viruses; each data point represents an individual currently classified species; accession numbers are listed in Table S1.
These accounted for 38% to 42% of all changes in the four SARS-CoV-2 data sets.
In seeking alternative nonbiological explanations for this observation, they cannot have arisen through misincorporation errors in the nex-generation sequence methods used to produce the data set because the analysis in the present study was restricted to consensus sequences.
There was, furthermore, no comparable increase in G→A mutations (Fig. 2), and the sequence context in which sequencing errors occur (a 5′ or 3′ C or G [17]) did not match the favored context for mutation observed in our data set (Fig. 6).
By definition, a coronavirus RNA genome descends from any other through an equal number of copies of the positive and negative strands—any tendency to misincorporate a U instead of a C would be reflected in a parallel number of G→A mutations where this error occurred on the minus strand (or vice versa).
The findings of C→U mutations at the consensus genome sequence level have also been observed within virus populations in a recent analysis of intrahost sequence diversity in lung-derived COVID-19 samples (36).
The combination of exceptionally long genomes (≈30,000 bases), an otherwise low mutation rate, and the unprecedented size of the present data set of accurate minimally divergent SARS-CoV-2 sequences assembled postpandemic has enabled these mutational signatures to be so clearly observed.
An RNA editing mechanism of the type discussed above evidently places a huge mutational load on SARS-CoV-2 that may underpin the abnormally high dN/dS ratios recorded in SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV sequence data sets (Fig. 1).
An additional data set of 117 well-curated SARS-CoV-2 sequences was downloaded from Konsiliarlabor für Coronaviren (https://civnb.info/sequences/) on 13 April 2020 and represents a further independent sample set.
A listing of further data sets of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and other human coronaviruses is provided in Table 1.
In evolutionary terms, the contribution of biased, convergent, and context-dependent mutations to sequence change in SARS-CoV-2 is substantial, and these processes are not incorporated by standard models used in molecular epidemiology investigations.
To understand the early evolutionary events following its emergence, a data set of 985 complete SARS-CoV-2 sequences was assembled.
Repeated cycles of mutation and reversion in favored mutational hot spots and the widespread occurrence of amino acid changes with no adaptive value for the virus represent a quite different paradigm of virus sequence change from neutral and Darwinian evolutionary frameworks and are not incorporated by standard models used in molecular epidemiology investigations.
In evolutionary terms, the contribution of biased, convergent, and context-dependent mutations to sequence change in SARS-CoV-2 is substantial, and these processes are not incorporated by standard models used in molecular epidemiology investigations.